## Preamble

```
SLP: 0002
Title: Increase Ledger Wide Read Bytes Limit for Soroban 
Authors:  Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
Consulted:
Status: Draft
Created: 2025-02-06
```

## Summary

This proposal suggests increasing the ledger-wide read byte limit which is a bottleneck for existing protocols. 

## Goals Alignment

Increasing the limit will support existing protocols to operate at scale, faciliating efficient and scalable everyday financial services.

## Limit Change Rationale

### Ledger read bytes limit

Soroban is often in surge pricing (20%-40% of Ledgers, Early February 2025) and the only resource getting exhausted is the read bytes.

Examining a simple [SoroSwap invocation](https://stellar.expert/explorer/public/tx/238820179026497536#238820179026497537) reveals that 64kb are read, mostly due to reading Wasm (two contracts in this instance). With the current ledger limit of 500kb this amounts to a theoretical limit of 7 swaps per ledger. Other ledger wide limits (read entries, write entries, instructions, ledger write bytes) allow for more than 50 similar swaps per ledger.  

We propose increasing the ledger read bytes limit to 3.5mb which will align with the other limits in allowing for 50 such swaps per ledger.

SoroSwap is one simple example, however increasing the limit will increase capacity for all Soroban protocols. 

#### Evaluation of current limits
- Benchmark transactions configured with 100M instructions, 50 RO entries, 50 RO entries, 500 bytes per entry, 100 80-byte events. 5 TPL.
Max ledger close: 211ms
Min ledger close: 194ms
Mean ledger close:  199ms

### Benchmarking with 3.5mb Ledger Read Bytes Limit 

Due to the various ledger limits, we test a combination of different resources being saturated.

- Transactions configured with 27.7M instructions, 6 RO entries (two of which are the contract code and instance), 0 RW entries, 48,000 bytes per entry. 18 TPL.
Max ledger close: 132ms
Min ledger close: 128ms
Mean ledger close: 129ms

- Transactions configured with 100M instructions, 88 RO entries, 12 RW entries, 2000 bytes per entry. 5 TPL.
Max ledger close: 185ms
Min ledger close: 176ms
Mean ledger close: 179ms

- Transactions configured with 100M instructions, 75 RO entries, 25 RW entries, 1100 bytes per entry. 5 TPL.
Max ledger close: 195ms
Min ledger close: 184ms
Mean ledger close: 187ms

#### Evaluation of ledger read byte limits

The close times in the benchmarks are all well below the 250ms limit we need to stay below. The read bytes do not have as much of an impact on close times as writes, as you can see above. The close times increase as well allocated more resources to writing.

### Long-term protocol impact

This change has no long term impact because [CAP-0066](../core/cap-0066.md) will remove the in-memory read-byte limit all together.

## Evaluation Outcome

The increase in the read bytes limit does not have a significant impact on close times, so the proposed limit of 3.5mb is acceptable. 

## References
