## Preamble

```
SLP: 0003
Title: Increase Ledger Wide Limits for Soroban  
Authors: Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
Consulted: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh> 
Status: Final
Created: 2025-04-23
```

## Summary

This proposal suggests increasing certain soroban ledger limits due to high demand and low utilization of resources.

## Goals Alignment

Increasing the limits will support existing protocols while allowing room for efficient and scalable everyday financial services.

## Limit Change Rationale

The network is in Soroban surge pricing close to 50% of the time while validator hardware is underutilized.

This proposal is for the following increases:

- soroban transaction count: 100 -> 1000 (10x, this is just a sanity limit and should be set high)
- entries read: 500 -> 1000
- entries write: 250 -> 500
- ledger read: 3500000 -> 7000000
- ledger write: keep at 143360 (to avoid performance degradation)
- instructions: 500000000 -> 600000000 (20% increase to avoid performance degradation)

### Capacity analysis 

Current soroban traffic is heavy on Kale's `plant()` invocations submitted through Launchtube. The following table illustrates the 
impact of the proposed changes on chain capacity for these invocations: 

|                | plant()        | current-limits | current-max-invocations | proposed-limits | proposed-max-invocations |
|----------------|----------------|----------------|-------------------------|-----------------|--------------------------|
| soroban-transaction-count| 2*             | 100            | 50                      | 1000            | 500            |
| entries-read   | 6              | 500            | 83                      | 1000            | 166                      |
| entries-write  | 4              | 250            | 62                      | 500             | 125                      |
| ledger-write   | 1,588          | 143,360        | 90                      | 143,360         | 90                       |
| ledger-read    | 21,412         | 3,500,000      | 163                     | 7,000,000       | 326                      |
| instructions   | 4,294,959      | 500,000,000    | 116                     | 600,000,000     | 139                      |

*Invocations submitted via launhctube are counted as two invocations due to fee sponsorship and current counting semantics  

### Evaluation of current limits

- Benchmark transactions configured with 100M instructions, 50 RO entries, 50 RO entries, 500 bytes per entry, 100 80-byte events. 5 TPL.
Max ledger close: 237ms
Min ledger close: 215ms
Mean ledger close:  221ms

### Benchmarking with proposed limits

Due to the various ledger limits, we test a combination of different resources being saturated.

- Transactions configured with 100M instructions, 50 RO entries, 5 RW entries, 500 bytes per entry. 6 TPL.
1. Max ledger close: 252ms
2. Min ledger close: 242ms
3. Mean ledger close: 245ms

- Transactions configured with 17M instructions, 6 RO entries, 0 RW entries, 48,000 bytes per entry. 35 TPL.
1. Max ledger close: 151ms
2. Min ledger close: 138ms
3. Mean ledger close: 142ms

- Transactions configured with 50M instructions, 50 RO entries, 50 RW entries, 240 bytes per entry. 10 TPL.
1. Max ledger close: 247ms
2. Min ledger close: 229ms
3. Mean ledger close: 237ms

### Long-term protocol impact

- Protocol 23 is expected later this year and will drastically change resource utilization. This will require rethinking these limits.
- If these ledger limits prove to be too taxing on validator hardware we can dial them back in a subsequent vote with minimal impact to app developers.

## Evaluation Outcome

The proposed limits increase is acceptable as its impact on close times is within the desired range.

## References
