## Preamble

```
CAP: 0044
Title: SPEEDEX - Configuration
Working Group:
    Owner: Jonathan Jove <@jonjove>
    Authors: Geoff Ramseyer <@gramseyer>
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@monsieurnicolas>
Status: Draft
Created: 2022-02-01
Discussion: TBD
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
Provide validators the ability to configure SPEEDEX.

## Working Group
This proposal is based on an earlier draft written by Geoff Ramseyer, which
Nicolas Barry has also contributed to.

## Motivation
SPEEDEX requires two kinds of configuration: the set of assets comprising the
market, and the parameters used by the built-in solver. The set of assets must
be configurable because the time to compute a solution increases with the number
of assets, so we cannot compute a solution for all assets. The parameters must
be configurable because different parameters may work better during different
market regimes.

### Goals Alignment
This proposal supports the development of SPEEDEX on Stellar, which in turn
supports the Stellar Network Goals

- The Stellar Network should run at scale and at low cost to all participants of
the network.
- The Stellar Network should enable cross-border payments, i.e. payments via
exchange of assets, throughout the globe, enabling users to make payments
between assets in a manner that is fast, cheap, and highly usable.

## Abstract
This proposal introduces `SpeedexConfigurationEntry`, a new type of
`LedgerEntry`, that tracks the assets that can be traded in SPEEDEX and the
solver configuration for computing the prices.

## Specification

### XDR changes
This patch of XDR changes is based on the XDR files in commit
(`a211531148f13ab38725bc176630793d657b7f88`) of stellar-core.

```diff mddiffcheck.base=a211531148f13ab38725bc176630793d657b7f88
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
index c870fe09..cb91c48d 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
@@ -473,6 +473,31 @@ struct LiquidityPoolEntry
     body;
 };
 
+enum SpeedexSolutionComparisonHeuristic
+{
+    PRICE_WEIGHTED_SQUARED_L2_NORM = 0
+};
+
+struct SpeedexSolverConfiguration
+{
+    SpeedexSolutionComparisonHeuristic heuristic;
+    uint32 minStepSize;
+    uint32 smoothness;
+};
+
+struct SpeedexConfigurationEntry
+{
+    Asset asset<>;
+    SpeedexSolverConfiguration solverConfig;
+
+    union switch (int v)
+    {
+    case 0:
+        void;
+    }
+    ext;
+};
+
 struct LedgerEntryExtensionV1
 {
     SponsorshipDescriptor sponsoringID;
@@ -503,6 +528,8 @@ struct LedgerEntry
         ClaimableBalanceEntry claimableBalance;
     case LIQUIDITY_POOL:
         LiquidityPoolEntry liquidityPool;
+    case SPEEDEX_CONFIGURATION:
+        SpeedexConfigurationEntry speedexConfiguration;
     }
     data;
 
@@ -557,6 +584,9 @@ case LIQUIDITY_POOL:
     {
         PoolID liquidityPoolID;
     } liquidityPool;
+
+case SPEEDEX_CONFIGURATION:
+    void;
 };
 
 // list of all envelope types used in the application
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x
index 84b84cbf..141c0a70 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x
@@ -122,7 +122,10 @@ enum LedgerUpgradeType
     LEDGER_UPGRADE_BASE_FEE = 2,
     LEDGER_UPGRADE_MAX_TX_SET_SIZE = 3,
     LEDGER_UPGRADE_BASE_RESERVE = 4,
-    LEDGER_UPGRADE_FLAGS = 5
+    LEDGER_UPGRADE_FLAGS = 5,
+    LEDGER_UPGRADE_ADD_SPEEDEX_ASSET = 6,
+    LEDGER_UPGRADE_REMOVE_SPEEDEX_ASSET = 7,
+    LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_TATONNEMENT_CONFIGURATION = 8
 };
 
 union LedgerUpgrade switch (LedgerUpgradeType type)
@@ -137,6 +140,12 @@ case LEDGER_UPGRADE_BASE_RESERVE:
     uint32 newBaseReserve; // update baseReserve
 case LEDGER_UPGRADE_FLAGS:
     uint32 newFlags; // update flags
+case LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_ADD_ASSET:
+    Asset speedexAddAsset; // add asset to list of eligible assets
+case LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_REMOVE_ASSET:
+    Asset speedexRemoveAsset; // remove asset from list of eligible assets
+case LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_SOLVER_CONFIGURATION:
+    SpeedexSolverConfiguration speedexNewConfig; // update solver configuration
 };
 
 /* Entries used to define the bucket list */

```

### Semantics
During the protocol upgrade, a `SpeedexConfigurationEntry` will be initialized
with an empty list of assets and a reasonable default solver configuration. The
default solver configuration will be detailed when the actual parameters are
specified.

There is only ever one `SpeedexConfigurationEntry`.

### The set of assets
`SpeedexConfigurationEntry.asset` is an ordered list of assets, using the same
ordering as CAP-0038. When an asset is added to the set, it must be inserted in
the appropriate location. The set can be modified by the upgrades
`LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_ADD_ASSET` and `LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_REMOVE_ASSET`.

### The add/remove asset upgrades
The upgrade `LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_ADD_ASSET` is valid if the asset is valid,
the asset is not a pool share, and the asset is not currently a SPEEDEX asset. 

The upgrade `LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_REMOVE_ASSET` is valid if the asset is
currently a SPEEDEX asset (which implies that the asset is valid, and that the
asset is not a pool share).

### The solver configuration upgrade
The upgrade `LEDGER_UPGRADE_SPEEDEX_SOLVER_CONFIGURATION` is valid if the
configuration is valid. The validity conditions will be detailed when the actual
parameters are specified.

## Design Rationale
SPEEDEX has a number of control parameters determining how to run the solver
(current default solver is Tatonnement). Most of these parameters can take any
value in a reasonable range and produce a reasonably good result. However,
based on changes in the distribution of data sent to SPEEDEX, Stellar may wish
to occasionally adjust or fine-tune these parameters. This CAP enables Stellar
to adjust these parameters without doing a full protocol update.

For example, one important parameter is the "smoothness" parameter (name TBD,
I've yet to come up with a concise but descriptive name). This parameter
specifies how offers behave within Tatonnement. An offer's optimal behavior is
a step function -- that is, sell all of its endowment iff the market price is
strictly greater than its limit price. Tatonnement works best, though, with a
smooth demand curve. This "smoothness" parameter defines an approximation of
offer optimal behavior -- offers sell their endowment fully if the market price
is at least (1+\mu) greater (multiplicatively) than their minimum price, not at
all if the market price is less than the offer's minimum price, and linearly
interpolate on the interim. Smaller smoothness parameters result in
harder-to-compute Tatonnement instances (which might require more rounds of
computation, e.g.), but more accurate results when Tatonnement successfully
converges. Experimentally, larger numbers of trade offers can allow Tatonnement
to handle smaller smoothness multipliers. As such, Stellar may want to adjust
the smoothness multiplier in response to network traffic.

### Alternative configuration mechanisms
A number of different approaches to SPEEDEX configuration were considered, in
addition to this proposal:

- validators propose the entire configuration, including the set of assets,
during nomination
- validators propose the solver configuration, but not the set of assets, during
nomination

The first proposal would be the SPEEDEX equivalent of anarchy. The market would
be different in every ledger, and people may not be able to trade when they want
to depending on which node nominates.

The second proposal is more palatable, but is still worse than this proposal. In
order for SPEEDEX to be robust to the nomination of a pathological solver
configuration, it must run a backup computation with a more trustworthy
configuration. But how should that configuration be chosen? It could be fixed or
chosen via upgrades. If it is fixed, then it won't be robust to changes in
market regime. If it is chosen via upgrades, then it reduces to this proposal.

With this proposal, the solver configuration _is_ for the backup computation.
But instead of nominating a solver configuration, nodes nominate a complete set
of candidate prices (not detailed in this proposal).

### All SPEEDEX assets in a single ledger entry
This proposal stores all SPEEDEX assets in a single ledger entry. Initially, I
had favored a design where every SPEEDEX asset has its own ledger entry because
it keeps the ledger entry size bounded. But every node needs to know the full
set of SPEEDEX assets in order to perform the price computation, which would
necessitate loading all of the SPEEDEX asset ledger entries anyway.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities
This proposal does not introduce any backwards incompatibilities.

### Resource Utilization
This proposal does not change resource utilization.

## Security Concerns
This proposal does not introduce any security concerns.

## Test Cases
None yet.

## Implementation
None yet.
