## Preamble

```
CAP: 0022
Title: Invalid transactions must have no effects
Author: David Mazières
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-06-20
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/stellar-dev/NtCwqWwAxRA
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

Invalid transactions lack sufficient signatures for proper
authorization, have sequence numbers that have already been used, or
have invalid time bounds.  Certain edge conditions cause invalid
transactions to be included in the transaction set produced by
consensus.  Currently, Stellar executes and fails invalid transactions
in the transaction set, which changes ledger state by increasing
sequence numbers and debiting transaction fees.  This specification
changes Stellar so that invalid transactions have no effect on the
ledger.

## Motivation

Allowing invalid--especially unauthorized--transactions to change
ledger state can lead to vulnerabilities in higher-layer protocols.
Consider a protocol in which two parties, A and B, execute a
transaction that contributes funds to an escrow account E and makes E
into a 2-of-2 multisig account.  The parties might be willing to this
given post-dated pre-signed transactions T1, T2 on E that allow each
of A and B to recover escrowed funds after a certain delay.
Unfortunately, if the previous owner of E can cause an invalid
(unauthorized) transaction to use up T1's sequence number, one of the
two users will be unable to recover funds.

### Goals Alignment

The changes described in this document help network security by
preventing unauthorized transactions from changing account state.
They also help scalability by facilitating the design of robust
payment channels.

## Abstract

We define three categories of transaction: successful, failed, and
invalid.  Invalid transactions must never change ledger state, even if
they are included in the transaction set output by consensus.  New,
conservative restrictions rule out current ways of passing invalid
transactions through consensus.  However, if invalid transactions do
make it through consensus through oversight or subsequently added
features, they must have no effects on the ledger.

## Specification

We define the following categories of transaction at the time of
execution:

* A **successful** transaction is one that meets all transaction- and
  operation-level prerequisites at the time of its execution.  The
  effects of a successful transaction's operations are applied to the
  ledger.  Successful transactions yield a result in which
  `TransactionResult.code` is `txSUCCESS`.  This document does not
  change which transactions are considered successful or the effects
  of executing such transactions.

* A **failed** transaction meets all valid transaction-level
  preconditions, including a valid transaction-level source account,
  valid sequence number, valid time bounds, and low signing weight for
  the source account.  However, one or more of a failed transaction's
  operations cannot execute---for instance because the `destination`
  of a `PAYMENT` no longer exists.  Failed transactions increase the
  sequence number of the transaction-level `sourceAccount`, charge a
  fee to the transaction-level `sourceAccount`, and yield a result
  with `TransactionResult.code` `txFAILED`.

* An **invalid** transaction fails to meet transaction-level
  preconditions at the time of execution, for instance because the
  sequence number is invalid or the signatures are insufficient to
  meet the `sourceAccount`'s low signing threshold.  Currently,
  invalid transactions are executed just like failed ones.  This
  document changes that behavior so that invalid transactions no
  longer have an effect on the ledger and do not produce a
  `TransactionResult`.  If an invalid transaction later becomes valid,
  it may be included again in a subsequent ledger.

A ledger that contains too many invalid transactions will reduce the
number of operations available to successful transactions and
negatively impact the ledger.  Since the source of an invalid
transaction does not incur any transaction cost, and since it may be
difficult in the general case to decide if a transaction is valid at
the time its fee is charged, we place restrictions on the composition
of the transaction set in a single ledger.  These rules are
conservative; they may force two valid transactions that could have
succeeded in the same ledger to be included in different ledgers.

If a transaction set S contains a transaction T, we use S[<=T] to
denote the subset of S consisting of transactions with the same
`sourceAccount` as T and a `seqNum` less than or equal to that of T (a
set that includes T itself).  A set S is **admissible**, and hence can
be a candidate for the consensus transaction set, if all of the
following hold for each transaction T in S:

* T's `sourceAccount` must exist and must have sufficient funds to pay
  the offered transaction fees for all of S[<=T].  (This restriction
  exists today.)

* T's sequence number will be valid if all other transactions in
  S[<=T] are executed. (This restriction exists today, and among other
  things implies a transaction set may not include a transaction with
  a stale sequence number or two distinct transactions with the same
  source account and sequence number.)

* Any transaction in S other than T that contains a `SET_OPTIONS` or
  `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation on T's `sourceAccount` must have the same
  `sourceAccount` as T and a greater sequence number than T.  This
  guarantees that a `SET_OPTIONS` or `BUMP_SEQUENCE` on T's
  `sourceAccount` cannot be ordered before T.  This new restriction
  specified by this document is not enforced today.

In addition to placing these restrictions on transaction sets, we
restore the behavior prior to `BUMP_SEQUENCE` in which sequence
numbers are increased at exactly the same time that the fee is
debited, before any operations are executed.  Currently, fees are
charged up front before any operations from any transactions execute,
while sequence numbers are increased at the time an operation
executes.  Now that we know a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` cannot be ordered before
an operation on the source account whose sequence is being bumped, we
can increase the sequence numbers up front when charging fees.

## Design Rationale

This design prevents people who are no longer authorized signers an on
account from affecting the account state.  However, it does so in a
way that avoids the ability to clog the ledger with invalid
transactions.

## Backwards Incompatibilities

There are some minor incompatibilities that should not impact users.
First, certain invalid transactions will no longer execute as failed
transactions because they will not execute at all.  However, in all
such cases, there was no guarantee the transactions would execute
anyway, because they could only execute when they happened to land in
the same ledger as another transaction with a `SET_OPTIONS` or
`BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation.  Hence the most likely effect of this
change is to thwart attacks on vulnerable higher-layer protocols.

Second, certain transactions can no longer execute in the same
ledger.  Again, there is never a guarantee that an operation can
execute in a particular ledger, so applications could not have relied
on this happening anyway.

Finally, sequence number increases will appear in
`TransactionMetaV1.txChanges` instead of
`TransactionMetaV1.operations[0]`.  This should be more intuitive.

## Security Concerns

The changes outlined in this document should for the most part improve
security by providing more consistent authorization of changes to
accounts.  The one potential risk is that attackers could clog the
network with invalid transactions without paying nearly the
corresponding amount of transaction fees.  That risk is mitigated by
the restrictions on transaction sets, but is something that must be
kept in mind when future CAPs add additional operations.

Any future operations or other transaction features added to the
network that can render transactions invalid may need to revise the
transaction set restrictions to prevent invalid transactions from
being admissible.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.
