```
CAP: 0063
Title: Soroban In-memory Read Resource
Working Group:
    Owner: Garand Tyson <@SirTyson>
    Authors: Garand Tyson <@SirTyson>
    Consulted: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>, Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>
Status: Draft
Created: 2024-12-09
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/discussions/1585
Protocol version: 23
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal introduces a new resource type for Soroban reads, distinguishing between in-memory and
disk reads. This also proposes automatic restoration for archived entries via `InvokeHostFunctionOp`.

## Working Group

As specified in the Preamble.

## Motivation

By distinguishing disk and in-memory reads, this proposal allows for significant increase in Soroban
read limits. This distinction also allows for safe automatic entry restoration, significantly improving UX.

### Goals Alignment

This change is aligned with the goal of lowering the cost and increasing the scale of the network.

## Abstract

[CAP-0062](cap-0062.md) introduces partial State Archival, where evicted and live Soroban state is stored in separate databases.
This separation allows live Soroban state to be efficiently cached entirely in memory, removing disc reads entirely for all
live Soroban state. However, classic state and evicted entries are still subject to disk reads.

This CAP introduces a new resource type for reads, distinguishing between disk reads and in-memory reads. By making this
distinction at the protocol level, read limits for Soroban data can greatly increase. This also opens the door for other
optimizations, such as a complete module cache for all live contracts.

Additionally, this CAP introduces automatic restoration via `InvokeHostFunctionOp`, where any archived key present in the
footprint is automatically restored. Initially in protocol 20, the state archival design was not solidified enough to
enable automatic restoration, so an explicit restore operation was required. While this was not technically required in
protocol 20, it was important for contract interfaces to reason properly about restoration such that when full state
archival was introduce, it would not break preexisting deployments. Given that the full State Archival design has been
mostly finalized in [CAP-0057](cap-0057.md), it is now appropriate to introduce automatic restoration.

## Specification

### XDR changes

```
--- a/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x
+++ b/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x
@@ -26,28 +26,28 @@ struct ConfigSettingContractComputeV0
 // Ledger access settings for contracts.
 struct ConfigSettingContractLedgerCostV0
 {
-    // Maximum number of ledger entry read operations per ledger
-    uint32 ledgerMaxReadLedgerEntries;
-    // Maximum number of bytes that can be read per ledger
-    uint32 ledgerMaxReadBytes;
+    // Maximum number of live Soroban entry read operations per ledger
+    uint32 ledgerMaxReadLiveSorobanEntries;
+    // Maximum number of live Soroban bytes that can be read per ledger
+    uint32 ledgerMaxLiveSorobanBytes;
     // Maximum number of ledger entry write operations per ledger
     uint32 ledgerMaxWriteLedgerEntries;
     // Maximum number of bytes that can be written per ledger
     uint32 ledgerMaxWriteBytes;
 
-    // Maximum number of ledger entry read operations per transaction
-    uint32 txMaxReadLedgerEntries;
-    // Maximum number of bytes that can be read per transaction
-    uint32 txMaxReadBytes;
+    // Maximum number of live Soroban ledger entry read operations per transaction
+    uint32 txMaxReadLiveSorobanEntries;
+    // Maximum number of live Soroban bytes that can be read per transaction
+    uint32 txMaxReadLiveSorobanBytes;
     // Maximum number of ledger entry write operations per transaction
     uint32 txMaxWriteLedgerEntries;
     // Maximum number of bytes that can be written per transaction
     uint32 txMaxWriteBytes;
 
-    int64 feeReadLedgerEntry;  // Fee per ledger entry read
-    int64 feeWriteLedgerEntry; // Fee per ledger entry write
+    int64 feeReadLiveSorobanEntry;  // Fee per live soroban ledger entry read
+    int64 feeWriteLedgerEntry;      // Fee per ledger entry write
 
-    int64 feeRead1KB;  // Fee for reading 1KB
+    int64 feeReadLiveSoroban1KB;    // Fee for reading 1KB of live Soroban state
 
     // The following parameters determine the write fee per 1KB.
     // Write fee grows linearly until bucket list reaches this size
@@ -60,6 +60,26 @@ struct ConfigSettingContractLedgerCostV0
     uint32 bucketListWriteFeeGrowthFactor;
 };
 
+struct ConfigSettingContractLedgerCostExtV1
+{
+    // Maximum number of evicted Soroban and classic entry read operations per ledger
+    uint32 ledgerMaxReadEvictedAndClassicEntries;
+
+    // Maximum number of bytes of evicted Soroban and classic state that can be
+    // read per ledger
+    uint32 ledgerMaxReadEvictedAndClassicBytes;
+
+    // Maximum number of evicted Soroban and classic entry read operations per transaction
+    uint32 txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicEntries;
+
+    // Maximum number of bytes of evicted Soroban and classic state that can be
+    // read per transaction
+    uint32 txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicBytes;
+
+    int64 feeReadEvictedAndClassicEntry;  // Fee per evicted Soroban/classic entry read
+    int64 feeReadEvictedAndClassic1KB;    // Fee for reading 1 KB of evicted Soroban/classic state
+};
+
 // Historical data (pushed to core archives) settings for contracts.
 struct ConfigSettingContractHistoricalDataV0
 {
@@ -302,7 +322,8 @@ enum ConfigSettingID
     CONFIG_SETTING_STATE_ARCHIVAL = 10,
     CONFIG_SETTING_CONTRACT_EXECUTION_LANES = 11,
     CONFIG_SETTING_BUCKETLIST_SIZE_WINDOW = 12,
-    CONFIG_SETTING_EVICTION_ITERATOR = 13
+    CONFIG_SETTING_EVICTION_ITERATOR = 13,
+    CONFIG_SETTING_CONTRACT_LEDGER_COST_EXT_V1 = 14
 };
 
 union ConfigSettingEntry switch (ConfigSettingID configSettingID)
@@ -335,5 +356,7 @@ case CONFIG_SETTING_BUCKETLIST_SIZE_WINDOW:
     uint64 bucketListSizeWindow<>;
 case CONFIG_SETTING_EVICTION_ITERATOR:
     EvictionIterator evictionIterator;
+case CONFIG_SETTING_CONTRACT_LEDGER_COST_EXT_V1:
+    ConfigSettingContractLedgerCostExtV1 ledgerCostExtV1;
 };
 }
diff --git a/Stellar-transaction.x b/Stellar-transaction.x
index 7d32481..0abe3e4 100644
--- a/Stellar-transaction.x
+++ b/Stellar-transaction.x
@@ -888,10 +888,31 @@ struct SorobanResources
     uint32 writeBytes;
 };
 
+struct SorobanResourcesExtV1
+{
+    // The maximum number of bytes of evicted Soroban state
+    // and classic state that can be read
+    uint32 readEvictedAndClassicBytes;
+
+    // Bitmap representing what Soroban entries in the
+    // footprint are evicted, based on the order of keys
+    // provided in the LedgerFootprint vectors. readOnly
+    // vector is first, followed by readWrite.
+    // If no keys are evicted, BitMap can be empty.
+    BitMap evictedSorobanEntries;
+};
+
 // The transaction extension for Soroban.
 struct SorobanTransactionData
 {
-    ExtensionPoint ext;
+    union switch (int v)
+    {
+    case 0:
+        void;
+    case 1:
+        SorobanResourcesExtV1 resourceExt;
+    } ext;
+
     SorobanResources resources;
     // Amount of the transaction `fee` allocated to the Soroban resource fees.
     // The fraction of `resourceFee` corresponding to `resources` specified 
diff --git a/Stellar-types.x b/Stellar-types.x
index 73c4e79..a4b7c7c 100644
--- a/Stellar-types.x
+++ b/Stellar-types.x
@@ -134,4 +134,7 @@ struct SerializedBinaryFuseFilter
     // Array of uint8_t, uint16_t, or uint32_t depending on filter type
     opaque fingerprints<>;
 };
+
+
+typedef opaque BitMap<>;
 }
```

### Semantics

#### Redefinition of Existing Resource Limits and Fees

While the XDR structs of the following fields in `ConfigSettingContractLedgerCostV0` have not changed,
the fields have been renamed. Previously, these fees and resource limits applied to all LedgerEntry
state. Now, they only apply to Soroban state that has not been evicted. Note that an entry can be archived,
but not yet evicted, in which case the entry is metered and charged via the "LiveSoroban" fees and resource, since it
exists in the live BucketList. I decided to name these entries "live" so it is easier to understand from a
contract developers perspective, since archived but not yet evicted state is an edge case, and "live" seemed
easier to understand wrt Soroban docs and terminology vs. non-evicted, but this can be changed.

- `txMaxReadLedgerEntries` -> `txMaxReadLiveSorobanEntries`
- `txMaxReadBytes` -> `txMaxReadLiveSorobanBytes`
- `ledgerMaxReadLiveSorobanEntries` -> `ledgerMaxReadLiveSorobanEntries`
- `ledgerMaxLiveSorobanBytes` -> `ledgerMaxLiveSorobanBytes`
- `feeReadLedgerEntry` -> `feeReadLiveSorobanEntry`
- `feeRead1KB` -> `feeReadLiveSoroban1KB`

Note: write related values, including BucketList target size and fee calculation, have not changed semantically. Both
Soroban and classic data share the same write fees.

#### Resources and Fees for Evicted and Classic State

Evicted Soroban state and classic state are subject to the following resource limits and fees. Evicted Soroban
state is defined as archived Soroban state that currently exists in the Hot Archive. Note that state can be archived
but not yet evicted. RPC preflight (via a captive-core endpoint) will be able to determine whether state is archived,
and whether or not the archived state has been evicted to populate TX resource footprints correctly.

- `ledgerMaxReadEvictedAndClassicEntries`
  - Maximum number of evicted Soroban and classic entry read operations per ledger
- `ledgerMaxReadEvictedAndClassicBytes`
  - Maximum number of bytes of evicted Soroban and classic state that can be read per ledger
- `txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicEntries`
  - Maximum number of evicted Soroban and classic entry read operations per transaction
- `txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicBytes`
  - Maximum number of bytes of evicted Soroban and classic state that can be read per transaction
- `feeReadArchiveAndClassicEntry`
  - Fee per evicted Soroban/classic entry read
- `feeReadArchiveAndClassic1KB`
  - Fee for reading 1 KB of evicted Soroban/classic state
    Maximum number of bytes of evicted Soroban and classic state that can be

Note: write related values, including BucketList target size and fee calculation, have not changed semantically. Both
Soroban and classic data share the same write fees.

#### Initial Network Config Settings

Initially, all evicted/classic limits and fees should match exactly the limits and fees of reads today. Limits must not
decrease from current values in order to prevent bricking existing contracts. In the worst case, a contract can read
up to `txMaxReadEntries - 2` classic entries today (all classic entries + wasm + instance). Current limits have been
carefully measured assuming disk access only, so the addition of in-memory state should not negatively affect the network
in any way should we maintain these values via evicted/classic limits.

For fees, it would be beneficial for live Soroban state to be cheaper than classic/evicted state. However, the cost of
classic/evicted state should not increase. From a network health perspective, in-memory reads should be preferred over
disk access, so providing a discount incentives healthy contract behavior.

Additionally, it is beneficial to encourage developers to use preflight regularly in preparation for full state archival.
Should fees for live Soroban state be the same as in-memory state, developers might elect to bypass preflight and construct
a "one shot" transaction. This would look like a transaction that only uses evicted/classic state and marks all Soroban entries
as evicted via the bitmap. While this would work currently, in the future when full State Archival is introduced, this might
break dApps, ad preflight would be required for proof generation and these "one shot" transactions would no longer be valid.
By maintaining smaller fees for live Soroban state, we encourage developers to preflight Soroban transactions for lower fees
in order to ensure ecosystem projects do not break with the addition of archival proofs.

TODO: Exact fee and limit calculations

#### `evictedSorobanEntries` BitMap

For the purposes of block creation, the `LedgerKey` alone is sufficient to distinguish between classic and Soroban data.
However, a disk read would be required prior to tx application in order to determine if a Soroban entry was live or evicted.
This exposes a significant DOS angle, so the footprint must statically declare which entries are live vs. evicted.

This is accomplished via the `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap. If any evicted Soroban entry is present in a tx's footprint,
it must provide a bitmap of length `sorobanEntries(footprint.readOnly).size() + sorobanEntries(footprint.readWrite).size()` bits.
For each non-evicted Soroban entry, the bitmap entry shall be false. For each evicted Soroban entry, the entry shall be true.
The bitmap positions correspond to the order of Soroban keys in the footprint, where `readOnly` entries are ordered before
`readWrite` entries. Additionally, the bitmap contains no information regarding classic entries. If a classic entry is in
the footprint, it is "skipped" wrt bitmap ordering. This means that if a tx's footprint contains 10 classic entries and 10
Soroban entries, the bitmap will be of size 5.

#### "Borrowing" Evicted/Classic Resources

Because in-memory Soroban live state access is strictly cheaper than disk access required by evicted and classic entries,
live Soroban state may also consume `txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicEntries` and `txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicBytes`. I.e. if
a tx declares a `txMaxReadEvictedAndClassicEntries` value of 10 and reads 1 classic entry and 9 live Soroban entries,
the tx will succeed as if it just read 10 classic entries. However, the in-memory accesses will be charged fees at the
evicted/classic entry rate.

If a live Soroban entry "borrows" evicted/classic resources, the entry does not need to be marked as evicted via the
`evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap.

#### Changes to `InvokeHostFunctionOp`

##### Automatic Entry Restoration

Whenever `InvokeHostFunctionOp` is applied, any archived state is
automatically restored prior to host function invocation. This restored state is then accessible to the host function.

Restored state is still subject to the same minimum rent and write fees that exist currently.

If an archived Soroban entry has not yet been evicted and still exists in the live BucketList, it is metered and charged based
on live Soroban state limits and fees. If an archived Soroban entry has been evicted, it is metered and charged based
on classic/evicted limits and fees. Additionally, evicted keys must be declared in the `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap.

##### Failure Codes

If an evicted entry is included in the tx's footprint but is not specified via the `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap, the
tx will fail with the `INVOKE_HOST_FUNCTION_ENTRY_ARCHIVED` code. If there are insufficient resources for entry restoration,
the tx will fail with the `INVOKE_HOST_FUNCTION_RESOURCE_LIMIT_EXCEEDED` code.

##### Meta

Whenever an entry is restored, it will be emitted as a `LedgerEntryChangeType` of type `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE`.
This will include the complete LedgerEntry of the restored entry. It does not matter if the entry has been
evicted or not, the meta produced will be the same.

If a restored entry is modified during host function invocation, another `LedgerEntryChangeType` will be
emitted corresponding to the entry change in addition to the `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE` restore event.
This is similar to the current meta schema, where the starting value of a LedgerEntry is emitted as
`LEDGER_ENTRY_STATE` followed by the change. This is similar, except that `LEDGER_ENTRY_STATE` is replaced
by `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE`.

#### Deprecation of RestoreFootprintOp(?)

With the addition of automatic restoration, there is currently no need for `RestoreFootprintOp`. Functionally, the same automatic
restoration behavior that exists in `InvokeHostFunctionOp` could be replicated in `ExtendFootprintTTLOp` to provide a single
"admin" op type for managing lifetimes and restoration.

Currently, `ExtendFootprintTTLOp` is rarely called, as most rent management is performed via contract calls. With the addition of
automatic restoration, I expect that `RestoreFootprintOp` will also be rarely invoked. It may make sense from a maintenance and UX
perspective to deprecate `RestoreFootprintOp` in favor of a single op type.

#### getledgerentry Endpoint

In order to facilitate state queries for RPC preflight, captive-core will expose the following HTTP endpoint:

`getledgerentry`

Used to query both live and archived LedgerEntries. While `getledgerentryraw` does simple key-value lookup
on the live ledger, `getledgerentry` will query a given key in both the live BucketList and Hot Archive BucketList.
It will also report whether an entry is archived, evicted, or live, and return the entry's current TTL value.

A POST request with the following body:

```http
ledgerSeq=NUM&key=Base64&key=Base64...
```

- `ledgerSeq`: An optional parameter, specifying the ledger snapshot to base the query on.
  If the specified ledger in not available, a 404 error will be returned. If this parameter
  is not set, the current ledger is used.
- `key`: A series of Base64 encoded XDR strings specifying the `LedgerKey` to query. TTL keys
  must not be queried and will return 404 if done so.

A JSON payload is returned as follows:

```json
{
"entries": [
     {"e": "Base64-LedgerEntry", "state": "live", /*optional*/ "ttl": uint32},
     {"e": "Base64-LedgerKey", "state": "new"},
     {"e": "Base64-LedgerEntry", "state": "archived"},
     {"e": "Base64-LedgerEntry", "state": "evicted"}
],
"ledger": ledgerSeq
}
```

- `entries`: A list of entries for each queried LedgerKey. Every `key` queried is guaranteed to
have a corresponding entry returned.
- `e`: Either the `LedgerEntry` or `LedgerKey` for a given key encoded as a Base64 string. If a key
is live or archived, `e` contains the corresponding `LedgerEntry`. If a key does not exist
(including expired temporary entries) `e` contains the corresponding `LedgerKey`.
- `state`: One of the following values:
  - `live`: Entry is live.
  - `new`: Entry does not exist. Either the entry has never existed or is an expired temp entry.
  - `archived`: Entry is archived, but not yet evicted, counts towards live soroban resources.
  - `evicted`: Entry is archived and evicted, counts towards evicted/classic resources.
- `ttl`: An optional value, only returned for live Soroban entries. Contains
a uint32 value for the entry's `liveUntilLedgerSeq`.
- `ledgerSeq`: The ledger number on which the query was performed.

Classic entries will always return a state of `live` or `new`.
If a classic entry does not exist, it will have a state of `new`.

Similarly, temporary Soroban entries will always return a state of `live` or
`new`. If a temporary entry does not exist or has expired, it
will have a state of `new`.

This endpoint will always give correct information for archived entries. Even
if an entry has been archived and evicted to the Hot Archive, this endpoint will
still the archived entry's full `LedgerEntry` as well as the proper state.

## Design Rationale

### UX Expectations

With the addition of the new read resource type, contract developers will need to reason about what types of data
they are accessing wrt limits. However, the system has been designed such that this should be straight forward.
From a correctness standpoint, all smart contracts can be guaranteed to only interact with live state. A contract
developer can assume that all Soroban state consumes only live Soroban resources, since the `RestoreFootprintOp`
(or equivalent in the case of deprecation) can restore all required Soroban entries before host function invocation
in the worst case. This means that from a limits perspective, only Soroban state vs. classic state must be considered
for contract correctness. However, there may be issues with usability or efficiency, discussed in the section below.

While contract developers only need to distinguish between Soroban and classic state for contract correctness, the
tx itself will still need to properly populate limits and the `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap based on whether or not
entries are archived. Similar to today, these resources and footprints will be generated automatically via RPC.
Specifically, RPC will correctly generate the footprint, `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap, live Soroban read values,
and evicted/classic read values. Thus most of the complexity introduced by these changes should be abstracted away.

Note that the RPC itself is not required to implement this behavior, but will call captive-core endpoints.

### Host Functions that are too expensive for automatic restore

Suppose an expensive contract is written, such that it uses the maximum live Soroban resources and the maximum
amount of classic/evicted resources when no entries are evicted. Should any Soroban entry be evicted, automatic
restoration would not be possible, as the restoration would exceed resource limits. In this case, it would be
necessary to manually issue a `RestoreFootprintOp` (or equivalent in the case of deprecation) prior to the
host function invocation.

Ideally, this should be avoided if possible. The challenge will be communicating this to developers. This may be accomplished
via documentation. Additionally, RPC could provide a warning to developers when the submitted invocation would
exceed network limits should a sufficient amount of state restoration be required. This may help developers catch this
class of performance issue earlier in the development process.

Despite warning and documentation, there will be expensive contracts that are not compatible with automatic restore
in all cases. For this reason, RPC preflight must be able to distinguish whether automatic restore is possible for a
given invocation. If it is not, preflight must return the appropriate `restorePreamble` and communicate that an
explicit restoration is required before function invocation.

### Expectations for Downstream Systems

RPC must make the following changes:

1. Ingest the new `LEDGER_ENTRY_RESTORE` restore changes. This includes interpreting the new `LedgerEntryChangeType`
correctly, but also correctly handling the case where an entry is restored and modified in the same ledger.
2. Distinguish between live and evicted Soroban state during preflight in order to populate the new resource types
and populate the `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmap.
3. Notify users if a given preflighted transaction will not be able to be automatically restored due to resource limits,
and provide a restore preamble for manual restoration in these cases.
4. Allow user queries for both live and evicted state via the `getledgerentry` endpoint.

Change 1 should be straight forward and is defined in the [InvokeHostFunctionOp Meta](#meta) section.

For change 2, the construction of the footprint, resources, and bitmap will be handled by the simulation
library. However, RPC will need to input a given LedgerEntry and its eviction state (whether or not it is evicted)
to the simulation library. RPC can accomplish this by utilizing the captive-core [`getledgerentry` HTTP endpoint](#getledgerentry-endpoint).

Change 3 is largely an interface problem. The simulation library is responsible for detecting whether or not
automatic restoration will violate current network limits and if a manual restore op is required. It is then
the responsibility of RPC to forward this information to the user in an actionable way. It may also be useful
to warn a user if a given transaction could in the future require manual restoration, even if it is not the case
with the current ledger state.

Change 4 allows wallets to effectively reason about ledger state. RPC integration is minimal, as internally
this endpoint can be implemented by calling the captive-core [`getledgerentry` HTTP endpoint](#getledgerentry-endpoint).

### Concerns regarding Automatic Restoration with Full State Archival

In protocol 20, there was no technical reason against enabling automatic restoration. However, the proof system
for full state archival was not finalized, and the explicit `RestoreFootprintOp` provided more future flexibility.
Additionally, it was important for developers to build preflighting transactions into their dApp flows.

If Soroban had launched with automatic restoration, it is possible many developers would attempt to avoid preflight
by creating transaction footprint and resource declarations manually with reasonable fee and resource assumptions.
In a system where explicit entry restoration is not required, the burden of resource discoverability is low, so
developers are not incentivized or required to build preflight into their tx submission system. Long term this is
a significant issue, as the addition of full state archival with proofs makes manual resource and footprint
declaration largely impossible. Any system that did not use RPC preflight would be broken by full state archival.

With this proposal, it is vital to ensure that automatic restore does not result in a situation where large numbers
of developers circumvent preflight. Two specific features of this proposal help ensure developers are incentivized
to build preflight into their flows now such that they are not broken later by archival proofs. Specifically,
lower cost in-memory read fees incentivize developers to minimize fees by using preflight to detect the maximum
number of entries currently live. Additionally, the requirement of `evictedSorobanEntries` bitmaps makes manually
constructing footprint challenging, as the developer would need to be able to distinguish live vs evicted state
to minimize fees. Given that preflighting will result in lower on-chain fees, and given that resource footprints
are somewhat challenging to create without captive-core seems to indicate that developers will preflight transactions
prior to submission as intended.

## Security Concerns

### Memory Based DOS Attack

By distinguishing between disk backed and memory backed reads at the protocol level, it is now required that
validators maintain all live Soroban state in memory. A significant increase in live Soroban state could
lead to an OOM based attack on the network.

However, this is not a significant concern. The `sorobanLiveStateTargetSizeBytes` (see [CAP-0062](cap-0062.md))
provides a soft cap on the amount of live Soroban state that can exist at any given time. This prevents any
sort of runaway memory issue. Additionally, because of the eviction process, there is a natural back pressure
applied to in-memory state, the rate at which can be controlled via network config settings. Finally, the rate
at which new state is created is also controlled via network configs, so there does not appear to be any
memory based DOS attack possible.

## Test Cases

TBD

## Implementation

TBD
