```
CAP: 0046-06 (formerly 0054)
Title: Smart Contract Standardized Asset
Working Group:
    Owner: Jonathan Jove <@jonjove>
    Authors: Jonathan Jove <@jonjove>, Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>,
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@monsieurnicolas>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
Status: Draft
Created: 2022-05-31
Discussion: TBD
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

Allow contracts to interoperate with Stellar assets.

## Motivation

A fungible asset is a fundamental concept on blockchains. Fungible assets can
conceptually be divided into two pieces: standard functionality enabling push
and pull transfers, and varying functionality around asset administration. Most
blockchain ecosystems have very little innovation in the space of fungible
assets, with developers often relying on open source implementations such as
OpenZeppelin.

Rather than rely on an open source implementation, developers should have access
to a native contract which fulfils typical needs. This does not prevent
developers from implementing their own fungible asset if the contract does not
meet their needs. But the efficiency gained from a native implementation should
reduce fees sufficiently to encourage most developers to choose the native
implementation when it is suitable.

The native implementation should serve as a compatibility layer for classic
assets. This ensures that any contract which can interoperate with new smart
assets can also interoperate with classic assets, and vice versa.

The advantage of a native implementation is that the semantics are known to the
protocol. This allows additional enhancements like a dedicated fee lane for
simple asset transfers, or the potential to use the asset in a high-throughput
parallel exchange like SPEEDEX.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
  create highly usable products
- The Stellar Network should enable cross-border payments, i.e. payments via
  exchange of assets, throughout the globe, enabling users to make payments
  between assets in a manner that is fast, cheap, and highly usable.

## Abstract

This proposal introduces a native contract implementation for tokens which is
suitable for both smart tokens and wrapped classic tokens. The interface tries
to follow an ERC-20 model, although functions perform their own authorization
more like EIP-2612 `permit`. Identifiers in these tokens can be contracts,
ed25519 public keys, or Stellar accounts.

## Specification

### XDR Changes

See the XDR diffs in the Soroban overview CAP, specifically those covering
new envelope types.

### Semantics: Data Format

The following types are used throughtout this proposal. The comment above each
type describes the way in which the type is serialized as an `SCVal`.

```rust
/******************************************************************************\
*
* Data Structures
*
\******************************************************************************/

pub struct Ed25519Signature {
    pub public_key: BytesN<32>,
    pub signature: BytesN<64>,
}

pub struct AccountSignatures {
    pub account_id: AccountId,
    pub signatures: Vec,
}

pub enum Signature {
    Invoker,
    Ed25519(Ed25519Signature),
    Account(AccountSignatures),
}

pub enum Identifier {
    Contract(BytesN<32>),
    Ed25519(BytesN<32>),
    Account(AccountId),
}

// Byte arrays and strings can be passed to contracts and stores using the Bytes type.
// BytesN is fixed size, while Bytes is variable
pub struct Bytes(EnvVal<Host, Object>);
pub struct BytesN<const N: usize>(EnvVal<Host, Object>);
```

### Semantics: Signatures

Signatures for this contract are over the following `SignaturePayload` type

```rust

pub struct SignaturePayloadV0 {
    pub network: Bytes,
    pub contract: BytesN<32>,
    pub name: Symbol,
    pub args: Vec,
}

pub enum SignaturePayload {
    V0(SignaturePayloadV0),
}

```

### Semantics: Initialization


```rust
/******************************************************************************\
*
* Initialization Interface
*
\******************************************************************************/

// Initializes a token contract that does not wrap an asset on the classic side.
// Should be used on a contract created with create_token_from_contract.
// Sets admin, decimals, name, and symbol
fn init(admin: Identifier, metadata: TokenMetadata) -> Result<(), Error>;
```

### Semantics: Descriptive Interface

The descriptive interface provides information about the representation of the
token.

```rust
/******************************************************************************\
*
* Descriptive Interface
*
\******************************************************************************/
// Get the number of decimals used to represent amounts of this token
fn decimals() -> Result<u32, Error>;

// Get the name for this token
fn name() -> Result<Bytes, Error>;

// Get the symbol for this token
fn symbol() -> Result<Bytes, Error>;
```

### Semantics: Token Interface

TODO: Specify u128 in CAP-0046

The token interface provides capabilities analogous to those of ERC-20 tokens.

```rust
/******************************************************************************\
*
* Token Interface
*
\******************************************************************************/
// Get the allowance for "spender" to transfer from "from"
fn allowance(from: Identifier, spender: Identifier) -> Result<u128, Error>;

// Verify from and nonce. Then increase the allowance by "amount" for "spender" to transfer from "from".
// If an allowance does not exist, set allowance to "amount".
fn increase_allowance(from: Signature, nonce: BigInt, spender: Identifier, amount: u128) -> Result<(), Error>;

// Verify from and nonce. Then decrease the allowance by "amount" for "spender" to transfer from "from".
// If amount is greater than the existing allowance, set the allowance to 0.
fn decrease_allowance(from: Signature, nonce: BigInt, spender: Identifier, amount: u128) -> Result<(), Error>;

// Get the balance of "id"
fn balance_of(id: Identifier) -> Result<u128, Error>;

// Verify from and nonce. Then transfer "amount" from "from" to "to"
fn xfer(from: Signature, nonce: BigInt, to: Identifier, amount: u128) -> Result<(), Error>;

// Verify spender and nonce. Then transfer "amount" from "from" to "to", consuming the allowance of "spender"
fn xfer_from(spender: Signature, nonce: BigInt, from: Identifier, to: Identifier, amount: u128) -> Result<(), Error>;
```

### Semantics: Admin Interface

The admin interface provides the ability to control supply and some simple
compliance functionality.

```rust
/******************************************************************************\
*
* Admin Interface
*
\******************************************************************************/
// If "admin" is the administrator and clawback is not disabled, clawback "amount" from "from".
// The "amount" is burned. This function can be used on deauthorized balances. 
fn clawback(admin: Signature, nonce: BigInt, from: Identifier, amount: u128) -> Result<(), Error>;

// If "admin" is the administrator, deauthorize "id"
fn deauthorize(admin: Signature, nonce: BigInt, id: Identifier) -> Result<(), Error>;

// If "admin" is the administrator, authorize "id"
fn authorize(admin: Signature, nonce: BigInt, id: Identifier) -> Result<(), Error>;

// If "admin" is the administrator, mint "amount" to "to"
fn mint(admin: Signature, nonce: BigInt, to: Identifier, amount: u128) -> Result<(), Error>;

// If "admin" is the administrator, set the administrator to "id"
fn set_admin(admin: Signature, nonce: BigInt, new_admin: Identifier) -> Result<(), Error>;

// If "admin" is the administrator, disable the clawback function for this contract 
fn disable_clawback(admin: Signature, nonce: BigInt) -> Result<(), Error>;

// Returns the current admin. If admin is not set, returns a zero ed25519 key
fn admin() -> Result<Identifier, Error>;
```

### Semantics: Classic Wrapper Interface

The wrapper interface is only provided for classic assets, allowing assets to
flow between classic and smart.

```rust
/******************************************************************************\
*
* Wrapper Interface
*
\******************************************************************************/
// Move "amount" from "id" on classic to "id" on smart
fn import(id: Signature, nonce: BigInt, amount: i64) -> Result<(), Error>;

// Move "amount" from "id" on smart to "id" on classic
fn export(id: Signature, nonce: BigInt, amount: i64) -> Result<(), Error>;
```

### Semantics: Deployment

#### Deploying a contract that allow wrapping Stellar classic assets

In order to guarantee uniqueness of wrapper contracts, `create_token_from_asset`
produces a deterministic contract identifier that does not depend on the creator
or any salt. This is achieved by introducing
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ASSET` in
[CAP-0046-02](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0046-02.md#contract-identifier-preimage-types).
The wrapper contracts should be initialized atomically with contract creation so
the right asset is passed in. `create_token_from_asset` should call the `init_asset`
function specified below after the contract is created.

Note that both functions below are not exposed for contracts to call. `create_token_from_asset`
can only be called through `InvokeHostFunctionOp` specified in [CAP-0046-04](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0046-04.md).

```rust
// Creates a contract that wraps a classic Stellar asset. The asset parameter should be
// the binary representation of the XDR Asset being wrapped. This will also call init_asset on the
// newly created contract to prevent the predetermined contract id for this asset from being taken.
fn create_token_from_asset(asset: Object) -> Result<Object, Error>;

// This is a built-in token contract function, but only
// intended to be called by create_token_from_asset.
// init_asset will initialize a contract for a wrapped classic asset
// (Native, AlphaNum4, or AlphaNum12). It will fail if the contractID
// of this contract does not match the expected contractID for this asset
// returned by Host::get_contract_id_from_asset. This function should only be
// called by the create_token_from_asset host function for this reason.
//
// No admin will be set for the Native token, so any function that checks the admin
// (clawback, deauthorize, authorize, mint, set_admin) will always fail
fn init_asset(asset_bytes: Bytes) -> Result<(), Error>;
```

#### Deploying a token contract that only operates on Soroban
```rust
// From CAP-0046-02 - Instantiates a contract with the source referring to the built-in token.
// Returns the newly created contractID.
fn create_token_from_contract(salt: Object) -> Result<Object, Error>;
```

Uniqueness does not apply to non-wrapper
token contracts, so this function uses the creating contract and a salt.

### Semantics: AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG

On Stellar classic, any trustline created tied to an issuer that has
`AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG` set will be deauthorized on creation. Maintaining this
requirement is important because it can be used to indicate a trustline that has
gone through KYC verification. If we ignore `AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG` in Soroban,
then it would be possible for accounts, contracts, and ed25519 identifiers to
interact with a token without going to KYC verification.

There are two possible solutions proposed here-

1. When `init_asset` is called to initialize a token that wraps a classic asset,
set a flag that disables all non-admin functions on the token contract if the
issuer exists and it has `AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG` set. This effectively locks assets
from that issuer out of Soroban, unless the issuer wraps the users Soroban
invocation with a authorize/deauthorize sandwich. This assumes Soroban will have
a mechanism to do multiple invocations atomically.
2. If a new balance is being written for an identifier in the token contract and
it's for a token that wraps a classic Stellar asset, check if the issuer has
`AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG` set. If it does, then reject the write with a failure
indicating that the balance is not authorized. That identifier should explicitly
be authorized by the issuer before it can be used. If the issuer doesn't exist,
then just assume it's authorized because the issuer account can be created by
anyone without `AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG` set.

## Design Rationale

### Asset Equivalence

From the perspective of a contract, smart assets and classic assets have exactly
identical semantics. This makes contract design and implementation easier by
reducing the number of edge cases to consider and tests to write.

### No Pre / Post Hooks

The main goal of this proposal is to create a standard asset with predictable
behavior. This preserves the ability to deliver certain future enhancements such
as a dedicated fee-lane for payments. If payments have arbitrary pre / post
hooks then any arbitrarily expensive program could get embedded into the payment
lane, significantly reducing the feasibility of such a concept.

### Several Authorization Mechanisms

This proposal supports several signature mechanisms to acknowledge the reality
that account-based multisig is a fundamental aspect of the Stellar ecosystem.
I anticipate many pure contract users will favor a single Ed25519 key because
fees will be lower, so we provide this option as well. Contracts cannot sign, so
they need a separate authorization mechanism too (achieved with
`get_invoking_contract`).

### Message Allows Caller to Be Specified

This is an extremely useful design point that makes it possible to couple
multiple signed messages. Consider the interface described in "Ecosystem
Support: Wrap-Then-Do Contract". This interface can receive multiple signed
messages. But an attacker could observe this on the network, then submit the
signed messages separately. By adding the caller to the signed message, it
allows the caller to perform additional consistency checks. For example, the
calling contract could receive a signature over a message containing the
coupled signed messages.

### Admin Interface

Unlike the existing Stellar protocol, which uses simple flags for compliance
controls, this proposal delegates all decisions regarding administrative
functionality to an administrator. The administrator can be a contract, a simple
Ed25519 key, or an existing Stellar account.

This design decision does not break compatibility with Stellar assets. If an
existing holder does not want to accept the new terms, they simply elect not to
wrap their asset. The ability to do this without breaking compatibility  is one
of the big advantages of using wrappers.

If people want an analog to the existing compliance semantics, we can provide a
reference administrator contract that implements them.

### Classic Wrapper Interface

The wrapper interface is only provided for classic assets. Smart assets do not
have a wrapper interface because those administered by contracts would lose
control over the wrapped assets. Smart asset issuers can always deploy their own
wrapper interface should they need it.

### No Total Supply

Total supply is confusing for classic assets because they can exist in wrapped
and unwrapped form. Total supply is also high contention when minting and
burning. Tokens that need to track total supply can do so by having the
administrator contract update it when calling `mint` and `clawback`.

### Deployment

Unlike earlier variants of this proposal (see CAP-0048 and CAP-0049), this
proposal does not implicitly deploy a wrapper for every classic asset. However,
anyone can deploy the wrapper for any asset. The main advantage to this approach
is that  we no longer need to special case the identifiers for these wrappers.
We still desire that these wrappers are unique, so they will be constructed
differently even though they have the same format.

Uniqueness is not a concern for smart tokens, so their identifiers are
constructed using the typical creator and salt approach.

### Clawback

The `clawback` function is enabled by default for non-classic tokens. For
classic tokens, `clawback` will be enabled only if `AUTH_CLAWBACK_ENABLED_FLAG`
is set on the issuer. If the issuer account is missing, `clawback` will be
disabled on initialization because anyone could create the missing issuer
account without any flags. Instead of checking for `AUTH_CLAWBACK_ENABLED_FLAG`,
we could just have `clawback` enabled by default, and allow the issuer to clear
it. I don't think this is a great idea because I think we'll see most issuers
not clear the flag even if they don't require clawback, making users hesitant to
use classic assets on Soroban.

Note that `clawback` can be disabled using `disable_clawback`, but it can not be
enabled. This matches the clawback behavior on Stellar classic.

### Balances are u128s

The options considered were u63 (contained in an ScVal), u64, u128, u256, and an
arbitrary precision big integer. Big integer is unnecessary since u256 is more
than enough to represent any reasonable balance. This is made more obvious when
looking at other chains and what they use (Solana uses u64, Near uses u128, and
ERC-20 uses u256). Note that a u63 is more efficient than u64 in Soroban because
the u63 can be contained in a 64 bit `ScVal`, while u64 will need be to an
`ScObject`, which only exists in the host and needs to be referenced by the guest.

Now the question is what should it be instead? u63 is the most efficient with
u64 close behind, but not the most flexible if you use more than a couple
decimal places. For example, a u64 balance with 9 decimal places would have a
max value of 18,446,744,073.709551615. Stellar classic uses a signed 64 bit
integer (which would be a u63 in Soroban) with seven decimal places, leading to
a max value of 922,337,203,685.4775807. These values might be sufficient in most
cases, but there are some edge cases where these limits are too small. For
example, the US Treasury has a cash balance of $636 billion. This barely works
in the Stellar case, but isn’t far off from reaching the max. It works in the
variable decimals case if you give up some decimals. There are other currency
and asset examples that exceed these limits as well. Instead of forcing issuers
to compromise on decimals, the best option is to use u128 balances.

u128 gives users more flexibilty than Stellar classic without compromising too
much in terms of performance. The performance implications of using u128 instead
of u63 or u64 should be measured.

### No approve function
This proposal does not include an `approve` function like the one specified in EIP-20. This was done to mitigate the allowance vulnerability specified in this [google doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YLPtQxZu1UAvO9cZ1O2RPXBbT0mooh4DYKjA_jp-RLM/edit). TLDR: If user A specified an allowance of 10 for B, then tries to reduce it to 5, B could spend the allowance before the reduction is accepted on the ledger, and then have an additional 5 to spend. Instead of reducing the allowance to 5, the user actually increased it to 15!

Instead of `approve`, this proposal specifies two functions to deal with allowances - `increase_allowance` and `decrease_allowance`.

### No explicit functions to burn
This proposal does that include a `burn` or `burnFrom` function that allows a user to burn a balance that it holds. This functionality can be imitated by just sending the balance to the zero ed25519 identifier. The alternative would be to implement `burn` and `burnFrom` similar to what the [OpenZeppelin ERC-20](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/contracts/2.x/api/token/erc20#ERC20Burnable) implementation does.  

### Ecosystem Support: Wrap-Then-Do Contract

One concern about the use of wrapped assets is that it will degrade the user
experience by requiring users of classic assets to submit additional
transactions: first wrap, then do. This can be avoided relatively easily by
implementing a generic wrap-then-do contract. A wrap-then-do contract might have
the following functions

```rust
fn do_then_unwrap(sig: KeyedAccountAuthorization, token: u256,
                  id: AccountAuthorization, amount: u128, contract: u256,
                  symbol: SCSymbool, parameters: SCVec) {
    // check that "sig" contains medium threshold signatures over
    //     Message::V0(MessageV0 {
    //         nonce: nonce_of(Identifier::Account(sig.publicKey)),
    //         thisContract: get_contract_id(),
    //         symbol: "do_then_unwrap",
    //         parameters: (token, id, amount, contract, symbol, symbol,
    //                      parameters),
    //         caller: Caller::Transaction,
    //     })
    // otherwise trap

    let keyedID = KeyedAccountAuthorization {
        publicKey: sig.publicKey,
        authorization: id;
    };
    call(contract, symbol, parameters);
    call(token, "unwrap", (keyedID, amount));
}

// signatures in "id" should be over messages that specify this contract as the
// "caller"
// signatures in elements of "parameters" should be over messages that specify
// this contract as the "caller"
fn wrap_then_do(sig: KeyedAccountAuthorization, token: u256,
                id: AccountAuthorization, amount: u128, contract: u256,
                symbol: SCSymbool, parameters: SCVec) {
    // check that "sig" contains medium threshold signatures over
    //     Message::V0(MessageV0 {
    //         nonce: nonce_of(Identifier::Account(sig.publicKey)),
    //         thisContract: get_contract_id(),
    //         symbol: "wrap_then_do",
    //         parameters: (token, id, amount, contract, symbol, symbol,
    //                      parameters),
    //         caller: Caller::Transaction,
    //     })
    // otherwise trap

    let keyedID = KeyedAccountAuthorization {
        publicKey: sig.publicKey,
        authorization: id;
    };
    call(token, "wrap", (keyedID, amount));
    call(contract, symbol, parameters);
}
```

### Possible Improvement: Contract Extensibility

One disadvantage of this design is the fact that token functionality must be
separated into different contracts. For example, a liquidity pool share token
will typically have `mint` and `burn` functions which can be called by any user.
This is not possible because there is no way to extend a contract, so the only
functions available will be those specified above. Instead, the additional
functions will need to be provided in a separate contract.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

This proposal is completely backwards compatible. It describes a new interface
to existing behavior that is accessible from smart contracts, but it does not
modify the existing behavior.

### Resource Utilization

This proposal will lead to more ledger entries for tracking token state,
increasing the total ledger size.

## Security Concerns

This proposal does not introduce any security concerns.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.
