## Preamble

```
CAP: 0021
Title: Generalized transaction preconditions
Author: David Mazi√®res
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-05-24
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/stellar-dev/NtCwqWwAxRA
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal generalizes the `timeBounds` field in `Transaction` to
support other conditions, including conditions that relax sequence
number checking and provide relative timelocks.

## Motivation

Sequence numbers are tricky for anything other than simple payments.
For instance, pre-authorized transactions can only execute when the
source account has a specific sequence number.  Worse yet, sequence
numbers make it difficult for protocols such as payment channels to
guarantee that one participant can execute a transaction signed by all
participants.  In general, an N-party protocol requires N auxiliary
accounts, one for each participant; each logical transaction
pre-signed by all N participants must actually be implemented as N
pre-signed transactions using each auxiliary account at a source, so
that one participant can still submit a pre-signed transaction even if
another participant has changed the sequence number on a different
auxiliary account.  This is further complicated by the need to
maintain a reserve balance on each auxiliary account.

### Goals Alignment

This proposal advances network scalability by facilitating off-chain
payment channels.

## Abstract

This proposal extends `AccountEntry` to keep track of the time and
ledger number at which the account's sequence number was last changed.
It also replaces the `timeBounds` field of `Transaction` with a union
that allows more general transaction preconditions.  One of these
preconditions requires that the sequence number of `sourceAccount`
have been modified at least some period of time in the past,
effectively providing a relative timelock.  Another precondition
optionally weakens sequence number checking so as to allow a
transaction to execute when the `sourceAccount` is within some range.

## Specification

`AccountEntry`'s `ext` field is extended to keep track of `seqLedger`
and `seqTime`--the ledger number and time at which the sequence number
was set to its present value.  Note that unlike `v1`, we do not add an
extra union at the end, because further changes can be accomplished by
re-versioning `ext`.  To minimize source-code changes required in the
face of such future extensions, the version 2 arm is called `cur`, and
can be renamed to `v2` when version 3 is added.  (At that point a
single function can be used to translate `v2` to the new `cur`, rather
than smearing the updated logic throughout the code.)

```c++
const ACCTENTRY_EXT_CUR_V = 2;

struct AccountEntry
{
    AccountID accountID;      // master public key for this account
    int64 balance;            // in stroops
    SequenceNumber seqNum;    // last sequence number used for this account
    uint32 numSubEntries;     // number of sub-entries this account has
                              // drives the reserve
    AccountID* inflationDest; // Account to vote for during inflation
    uint32 flags;             // see AccountFlags

    string32 homeDomain; // can be used for reverse federation and memo lookup

    // fields used for signatures
    // thresholds stores unsigned bytes: [weight of master|low|medium|high]
    Thresholds thresholds;

    Signer signers<20>; // possible signers for this account

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    case 1:
        struct
        {
            Liabilities liabilities;

            union switch (int v)
            {
            case 0:
                void;
            }
            ext;
        } v1;

    case 2:
        struct
        {
            Liabilities liabilities;

            // Ledger number at which `seqNum` took on its present value.
            uint32 seqLedger;

            // Time at which `seqNum` took on its present value.
            TimePoint seqTime;
        } cur;
    }
    ext;
};
```

Preconditions are represented by a new `Preconditions` union with
discriminant `type`.  Values `PRECOND_NONE` and `PRECOND_TIME` are
binary compatible with the current `timeBounds` field (which is of
time `TimeBounds*`).  Value `PRECOND_GENERAL` is the new type of
precondition.  Note that `minSeqNum`, if non-NULL, relaxes the range
of sequence numbers at which a transaction can be executed.  However,
after executing a transaction, `sourceAccount`'s sequence number is
always set to the transaction's `seqNum`--like a `BUMP_SEQUENCE`
operation.  This guarantees transactions cannot be replayed, even when
the previous account `seqNum` is well below the transaction's
`seqNum`.

```c++
struct LedgerBounds {
  uint32 minLedger;
  uint32 maxLedger;
};

struct GeneralPreconditions {
    TimeBounds *timeBounds;

    // Transaciton only valid for ledger numbers n such that
    // minLedger <= n < maxLedger
    LedgerBounds *ledgerBounds;

    // If NULL, only valid when sourceAccount's sequence number
    // is seqNum - 1.  Otherwise, valid when sourceAccount's
    // sequence number n satisfies minSeqNum <= n < tx.seqNum.
    // Note that after execution the account's sequence number
    // is always raised to tx.seqNum, and a transaction is not
    // valid if tx.seqNum is too high to ensure replay protection.
    SequenceNumber *minSeqNum;

    // For the transaction to be valid, the current ledger number
    // must be at least minSeqLedgerGap greater than sourceAccount's
    // seqLedger.
    uint32 minSeqLedgerGap;

    // For the transaction to be valid, the current ledger time must
    // be at least minSeqAge greater than sourceAccount's seqTime.
    uint32 minSeqAge;
};

enum PreconditionType {
    PRECOND_NONE = 0,
    PRECOND_TIME = 1,
    PRECOND_GENERAL = 2,
};

union Preconditions switch (PreconditionType type) {
    case PRECOND_NONE:
        void;
    case PRECOND_TIME:
        TimeBounds timeBounds;
    case PRECOND_GENERAL:
        GeneralPreconditions general;
};
```

Then we simply replace `timeBounds` in the `Transaction` structure:

```c++
struct Transaction
{
    // account used to run the transaction
    AccountID sourceAccount;

    // the fee the sourceAccount will pay
    uint32 fee;

    // sequence number to consume in the account
    SequenceNumber seqNum;

    // validity conditions
    Preconditions cond;

    ...
};
```

A transaction whose preconditions are not satisfied is invalid and
must not execute (even to fail), meaning it cannot change the
`sourceAccount` sequence number or charge a fee.  To insure invalid
transactions do not propagate, a transaction with a non-zero
`minSeqLedgerGap` or `minSeqAge` may not execute in the same ledger as
a transaction with a lower `seqNum` on the same `sourceAccount`.

## Design Rationale

Relative timelocks are a known mechanism for simplifying payment
channels, implemented by Bitcoin and used in lightning payment
channels.  Stellar's lack of UTXOs combined with transaction sequence
numbers make payment channels harder to implement.  This proposal
rectifies the problem in a way that is not too hard to implement in
stellar-core provides a good degree of backwards compatibility.

Fundamentally, what a payment channel requires is a way to enforce a
time separation between declaring that one wants to execute a
pre-signed transaction T and actually executing T.  Furthermore,
between the declaration and execution, other parties need a chance to
object and invalidate T if there is a later T'.  The relative timelock
provides this separation, while the relaxing of sequence numbers makes
it easy to object by pre-signing a transaction invalidating T that can
be submitted at a variety of sequence numbers.

An earlier version of the proposal did not contain the
`minSeqLedgerGap` field.  However, members of the payment channel
working group were concerned that the network could, in a worst-case
scenario, experience downtime right after someone incorrectly closes a
payment channel, precluding the other party from correcting the
problem.  `minSeqLedgerGap` thus guarantees that there will be an
opportunity to correct the problem when the network comes back up,
because the pre-signed transaction with a `minSeqLedgerGap` will still
not be immediately executable.

It's worth asking whether we need `minSeqAge` if we have
`minSeqLedgerGap`.  The reason to keep it is if, under heavy load, the
network for some reason might start processing ledgers faster than
once every 5 seconds.  This might happen after periods of downtime.

### Payment Channel Example

Here is how the proposed mechanism can be used to implement a payment
channel between two parties A and B.  The payment channel consists of
a 2-of-2 escrow account E and a series of sets of transactions on E of
the form:  (B1,C1A,C1B), (B2,C2A,C2B), ....  The sequence numbers of
Bi, CiA, and CiB are consecutive and non-overlapping for different
values of i (e.g., Base+3i+1, Base+3i+2, Base+3i+3).

Transactions CiA and CiB are called _closing_ transactions.  CiA
returns A's portion of the escrow account to A, while CiB uses
`SET_OPTIONS` to give B increased signing weight on E so that B
controls the remainder of the funds.  CiA has a `minSeqAge` of 24
hours.  Conceptually, CiA and CiB constitute a single logical
transaction.  Unfortunately, A could make operations in CiA fail (for
instance by deleting the account or trustline into which the
transaction will pay out).  Making CiA and CiB separate transactions
ensures B can gain control of the account even if A misbehaves in this
way.

Transaction Bi is called a _bump_ transaction.  It's purpose is to
declare the intent to execute CiA and CiB by adjusting E's `seqNum`
such that CiA and CiB can execute.  Though Bi's `seqNum` is one less
than CiA's, Bi uses `minSeqNum` so that it can run at any previous
sequence number as well.  This ensures that executing Bi does not
invalidate Bj for j>i.

For each offline payment, the participants first sign and exchange CiA
and CiB, then sign and exchange Bi.  To close the channel
unilaterally, a participant submits Bi for the highest available i
value, then after the `minSeqAge` expires submits CiA and CiB.  If a
participant cheats and submits Bi when the highest bump transaction is
Bj, the other participant has 24 hours to notice the sequence number
change on E and submit Bj.

To fund or top-up the escrow account E, the participants first sign a
CiA, CiB, and Bi such that none of the transactions is executable and
the sequence number is higher than any previously used.  Then the
funding transaction simply raises E's `seqNum` to make Bi valid.

## Backwards Incompatibilities

The binary XDR of all previously valid transactions will also
unmarshal to a valid transaction under the current proposal.
Obviously legacy software will not be able to parse transactions with
the new preconditions, however.

## Security Concerns

The security concerns stem primarily from new types of transaction
making use of the new features.  As such, the new preconditions,
particularly `minSeqNum`, should make pre-signed transactions less
brittle and simplify protocols.  Nonetheless, there is still a lot of
room for error in protocols.  Specifically, there is no mechanism that
can reliably pay out to multiple mutually distrustful parties, as one
recipient could delete its account causing the entire transaction to
fail.  Hence it is still necessary to close payment channels with
multiple transactions, one per party.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.
