# CAP-0034: Preserve Transaction-Set/Close-Time Affinity During Nomination

## Preamble

```text
CAP: 0034
Title: Preserve Transaction-Set/Close-Time Affinity During Nomination
Authors: Terence Rokop, Nicolas Barry
Status: Final
Created: 2020-07-06
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/issues/622
Protocol version: 14
```

## Simple Summary

Make the nomination protocol select the close time from the single candidate
whose transaction set it selects (rather than the current protocol's selection
of the maximum close time of all candidates), and preserve the signature of the
chosen `<close time, transaction set>` pair.

## Motivation

The most severe problem addressed by the CAP is a race condition which means
that smart contracts can not, with the current protocol, safely be written as
chains of dependent transactions with incrementing sequence numbers, because
there is no way for a client to guarantee that a transaction will succeed if it
consumes a sequence number. There is always a possibility that it will return
`txTOO_LATE`.  But returning `txTOO_LATE` while consuming a sequence number
(and being charged a fee) violates our
[API documentation](https://www.stellar.org/developers/guides/concepts/transactions.html),
which states that "If the transaction is invalid, it will be immediately
rejected by stellar-core based on the validity rules of a transaction, the
account’s sequence number will not be incremented, and no fee will be consumed
from the source account", where the referenced
["validity rules of a transaction"](https://www.stellar.org/developers/guides/concepts/transactions.html#validity-of-a-transaction)
include "The transaction must be submitted within the set time bounds of the
transaction, otherwise it will be considered invalid".
There may therefore _be_ smart contracts which are structured this way, and are
allowed to be structured this way according to our published API, yet are
vulnerable to inconsistencies because of this race.

A less catastrophic problem, but an inefficiency, is that externalizing
transaction sets that contain significant numbers of transactions that are
doomed to return `txTOO_LATE` during ledger close might mean that we're
choosing sets that we would have not have chosen over other available
candidates if we had taken into account that those transactions were doomed.

More cosmetically, it might also come across as unfair, or at least
counterintuitive, considering that getting into a transaction set is what a
client pays a fee for, that the occasional transaction might be charged a fee
despite being rejected for not having made it into a transaction set in time.
Although this race is different from the perspective of stellar-core from the
usual case of `txTOO_LATE` in which the transaction is discovered to have
expired before being accepted into the transaction set, the race looks the same
from the client's perspective as any other `txTOO_LATE` -- except that when the
race is the cause, the client is, inexplicably from its perspective, charged a
fee.

Closing the race that leads to a transaction returning `txTOO_LATE` while being
charged a fee and consuming a sequence number may therefore be viewed as having
desirable effects on both good-faith transactions and bad-faith (spam)
transactions:

- Good-faith transactions should not be charged a fee without being included in
a ledger, and should certainly not be subject to potential inconsistencies when
part of smart contracts that depend upon sequence numbers to manage
dependencies.

- Bad-faith transactions should not be allowed into fill up ledgers, starving
out good-faith transactions.  This CAP ensures that consensus gets the
opportunity to select transaction sets from among transactions that would be
guaranteed not to return `txTOO_LATE` if they were externalized, so ledgers
would only be filled by transactions that could actually be applied.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should be secure and reliable.

- The Stellar Network should run at scale and at low cost to all users.

It also aligns with the following Stellar Network Value:

- The protocol should bias toward simplicity.

## Abstract

Currently, the nomination protocol produces, from a set of candidate
`StellarValue`s, a nominated `StellarValue` comprising the composited
transaction set (as selected by a deterministic heuristic which chooses
one particular input set and favors larger sets), the maximum `closeTime` of any
candidate, and a set of "maximal" ledger `upgrades` from all candidates.

We propose to change the protocol to take the `closeTime` from the same
candidate `StellarValue` as the chosen transaction set (the heuristic which
decides which transaction set to choose does not change; nor does the method of
generating `upgrades`).  The protocol would then validate all transaction sets
against their associated `closeTime`s, and could use `SIGNED` `StellarValue`s
throughout the ballot protocol as well as the nomination protocol.

The effect is that all trimming and validating of transaction sets during the
nomination and ballot protocols use the exact same conditions as the validation
of transactions does during ledger close.  (Today, they differ:  the nomination
and ballot protocols use the last ledger close time, whereas ledger close uses
the new ledger close time.  This CAP allows this precise alignment because it
allows the nomination and ballot protocols to predict exactly what the next
ledger close time will be _if_ the transaction set that they are validating is
ultimately externalized.)

In particular, this affects how soon the core notices when transactions expire.

## Specification

There are no changes to any XDR in this CAP.  The treatment of the `closeTime`
in the `StellarValue` XDR in some code paths changes, as does the use of
`SIGNED` `StellarValue`s in some places where `BASIC` ones are currently used,
but the XDR itself does not change.

This CAP proposes to change the compositing function, which chooses a
`StellarValue` to start the ballot protocol on, to remove the current combining
of closetimes and simply select the one from the same `StellarValue` as the
selected transaction set.  (This CAP proposes to preserve the existing selection
heuristic for "composited transaction set" unchanged.)

This CAP also proposes to trim and validate transaction sets in `StellarValue`s
(in all places where such trimming or validating is currently done) against the
`closeTime` in the same `StellarValue`.  The `closeTime` affects whether a
transaction with an upper time bound (`maxTime`) returns `txTOO_LATE`, and
whether a transaction with a lower time bound (`minTime`) returns `txTOO_EARLY`.
Those are therefore the two transaction-validity tests which are affected by
the change in which `closeTime` is used to validate transactions.

This CAP also proposes to make the nomination protocol produce a signed
value (currently we nominate an unsigned, or "basic", value, because, as a
combination of candidate values, it may not be equal to any one candidate value
for which we have a signature). It does not propose any specific use of that
signature yet, but preserving the signature as part of the same protocol
change that allows it to be preserved will allow us to use it in the future if
we discover a way to do so.

As with any protocol change, the new code must remember and maintain
older protocols' behavior, and continue to use old behavior until after
the network externalizes the ledger upgrade to the new protocol, through
consensus.

The changes in this CAP build upon changes already made (without a CAP, since
they were not protocol changes, but changes to the heuristics that a node uses
to decide which transactions to flood and which to include in its first
nominated transaction set in a new ledger) in
[PR 2608](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-core/pull/2608).  Those changes
already reduce the potential network burden of flooding transactions that appear
likely to expire before getting into transaction sets, and they introduce some
interfaces into the code which the code for this CAP can naturally re-use.

Therefore, we present the semantics in three stages:  the behavior as released,
the latest unreleased behavior (which contains heuristic but no protocol
changes, and therefore involved no CAP), and the behavior as proposed in this
CAP.  **Bold** text indicates a semantic change from the previous stage.  The
proposal in this CAP embodies the **bold** semantics in the last column only;
the **bold** semantics in the middle column are for context.

| Index (for later reference) | Decision point                                                                                                             | Released behavior                       | Latest unreleased behavior (PR 2608)                                                                 | CAP behavior                                                                                     |
| --------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 1                           | Which transactions to flood?                                                                                               | Valid with respect to last ledger close | **Valid with respect to last ledger close; unexpired with respect to estimate of next ledger close** | Valid with respect to last ledger close; unexpired with respect to estimate of next ledger close |
| 2                           | Which time bounds to require for transactions to be included (not trimmed) in the `StellarValue` a node votes to nominate? | Valid with respect to last ledger close | **Valid with respect to last ledger close; unexpired with respect to estimate of next ledger close** | **Valid with respect to `closeTime` to nominate in same `StellarValue`**                         |
| 3                           | Which close time to validate transaction sets against in nomination and ballot protocols?                                  | Last ledger close time                  | Last ledger close time                                                                               | **`closeTime` in same `StellarValue` as transaction set**                                        |
| 4                           | Which close time to produce in composite value?                                                                            | maximum of all candidates' `closeTime`s | maximum of all candidates' `closeTime`s                                                              | **`closeTime` in same `StellarValue` as chosen ("composited") transaction set**                  |
| 5                           | Expect `BASIC` or `SIGNED` `StellarValue` in a composite value to be used in the ballot protocol?                          | `BASIC`                                 | `BASIC`                                                                                              | **`SIGNED`**                                                                                     |

## Design Rationale

It has seemed from the beginning that the problem could be addressed only
through a CAP: it is a question of what relationships to maintain among the
payment of fees, the consumption of sequence numbers, and the validity of
transactions, that also leads to a question of what value to nominate given a
set of candidates, and all of those questions must be answered by the Core
through consensus.

1. The proposal prevents the race that motivated the CAP; it ensures in all
cases that a transaction that returns `txTOO_LATE` does not consume a sequence
number and does not pay a fee.  This is ensured because before a transaction
set gets to the point of having its transaction fees paid (which happens when a
ledger is closing), we composite the candidate `<txSet,closeTime>` pairs into
one, and with the CAP behavior we do so by simply selecting one candidate.
And every candidate has by the time of compositing been validated, including
against the new condition that it contains no transactions that are expired
with respect to its `closeTime`.

2. The proposal prevents an ill-behaved validator from intentionally triggering
the race that motivated the CAP through what we shall call "maximum `closeTime`
injection": the ill-behaved validator could previously try to force transactions
in transaction sets proposed by other nodes to fail during ledger close by
proposing as large a `closeTime` as allowed (the maximum time slip is currently
one minute).

3. This proposal refines
[PR 2608](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-core/pull/2608)'s
trimming of transactions prior to initial nomination by changing the
next-ledger-`closeTime` estimate (which PR2608 itself had changed from
last-ledger-`closeTime`) to `closeTime`-within-`StellarValue`.  Given this CAP's
semantics, we know at this point that that `closeTime` is the _exact_ one that
will be chosen as the ledger close time _if_ the transaction set is ultimately
externalized, so we can trim precisely the most efficient set of transactions:
we trim all of those which would have later returned `txTOO_LATE` if the
transaction set were ultimately externalized, and we are guaranteed that none of
those which survives trimming will return `txTOO_LATE` if the transaction set is
ultimately externalized.

4. This CAP in general makes changes to transaction set composition and validity
in the earliest protocol phases possible, making use of knowledge as soon as we
have it.  The previous point is an example -- we trim a transaction set prior to
first nomination precisely when we decide on which `closeTime` to nominate
in the same `StellarValue` with it, which also tells us precisely which
transactions we may as well trim because they'll be expired at ledger close time
if that `StellarValue` is ultimately externalized. The change in the validation
of transaction sets in the nomination and ballot protocols is a similar example;
we can do more accurate validation than we could before this CAP, when all we
could validate against was the last ledger close time.

5. This CAP makes the `closeTime`-related transaction validity checks (the
tests for `txTOO_EARLY` and `txTOO_LATE`) throughout consensus exactly
equivalent to those used during ledger close.  Previously, the tests used during
consensus (which this CAP changes to align with those used during ledger close)
were weaker than the tests used during ledger close with respect to
`maxTime`/`txTOO_LATE` (the consensus checks could admit transactions which,
if they were ultimately externalized, ledger close would later reject with
`txTOO_LATE`), and stronger than the tests used during ledger close with respect
to `minTime`/`txTOO_EARLY` (the consensus checks could reject transactions with
`txTOO_EARLY` which, had they been allowed and ultimately externalized, would
_not_ have been rejected with `txTOO_EARLY` during ledger close).

6. This CAP, in both the change it proposes to protocol semantics and the
changes it would induce in the code structure, facilitates the option to
perform a follow-on change to the work done in PR 2608 which would further
refine our heuristic for choosing which transactions to flood by allowing
some transactions to be flooded which would be `txTOO_EARLY` if the next ledger
were to close immediately, but which we estimate will no longer be `txTOO_EARLY`
by the time the next ledger actually does close.  (That would not introduce any
race analogous to the one that this CAP fixes with respect to `txTOO_LATE`,
because the nomination and ballot protocols would still discover that a
transaction would be invalid with `txTOO_EARLY` before it reached the point of
being in a closing ledger and therefore failing validation while nevertheless
consuming a sequence number and being charged a fee.)

7. This CAP has had a modest "test" in that it is the third proposal that we
have considered, and appears not to suffer from any of the weaknesses which led
us to reject the first two; see "Rejected alternatives" below for details.

### Detailed illustration of failure mode with current protocol

With the current protocol, the following sequence of events can occur:

1. A smart-contract client submits a series of transactions `T1`, `T2` with
`T2`'s sequence number one greater than `T1`'s.  `T2` is intended have its
operations applied if and only if `T1`'s are applied first; the smart contract
is depending upon `T2` having the wrong sequence number if `T1`'s operations
are not applied (in which case the smart contract expects that `T1` will not
have consumed a sequence number).  The smart contract sets an expiration time on
`T1` (as our
[documentation](https://www.stellar.org/developers/guides/concepts/transactions.html)
"highly advises" that clients do).

2. The ledger happens first to have capacity to accept `T1` into a transaction
set between `T1`'s expiration time and the time at which it will turn out (of
course the network can not foresee that this will eventually be the case) that
the next ledger will close.

3. `T1` happens at that point to be in the transaction queue of the validator
who (though again this is not predictable yet) will turn out to nominate the
`StellarValue` that will ultimately be externalized. That node builds a
transaction set that contains `T1`.

4. The transaction set containing `T1` is externalized, but (at least) one of
the candidate `closeTime`s is greater than `T1`'s expiration time.

5. Transactions are applied using the maximum of all candidate `closeTime`s as
the new last ledger close time.  `T1` therefore returns `txTOO_LATE`, and its
operations are not applied.  However, as it reached ledger close before being
failed, it consumes a sequence number (and is charged a fee).

6. `T2` gets into an externalized transaction set (possibly, but not
necessarily, the same one that `T1` got into) before it too expires.  It
has the correct sequence number, because `T1` consumed a sequence number.
`T2`'s operations are therefore applied -- even though its preconditions were
intended to include guarantees that `T1`'s operations had ensured, so the
actual postconditions of `T2` could violate any of the smart contract's intended
invariants which had depended upon `T1`'s operations having succeeded before
`T2`'s operations could be applied.

So `T` consumes a sequence number (and is charged a fee) but is never applied.
There is a design pattern in some smart contracts which breaks, allowing
inconsistent transactions to be committed, if it encounters this race:  a smart
contract might submit a chain of transactions, with incrementing sequence
numbers, each intended to be applied only if the previous ones succeeded.  If
there were transactions that were intended to be constrained by the incrementing
sequence numbers only to be applied if `T` succeeded, they could do so because
`T` had consumed its sequence number, even though it was never applied. The
dependent transactions would then perform operations which the smart contract
had intended to be performed only if `T` had succeeded. This would
potentially be arbitrarily bad for the smart contract.

With the behavior proposed in this CAP, step #3 -- a node building a transaction
set containing `T1` -- would only occur if `T1` were not expired with respect to
the `closeTime` in the same proposed `StellarValue` as that transaction set.
Otherwise, `T1` would not make it into a transaction set, and would therefore
never consume a sequence number (or be charged a fee), and `T2` would fail
validation with a bad sequence number, as the smart contract intended in that
case.  If `T1` did make it into a transaction set, then, under the new behavior
in this CAP, step #5 would change -- if the transaction set containing `T1` won
nomination, then the `closeTime` of the new ledger would be the `closeTime` from
the same `StellarValue` as `T1`, with respect to which `T1` is in this case not
expired.  Hence, `T1` would be applied during ledger close; it would not return
`txTOO_LATE`.  `T2` would therefore have the opportunity to be applied (assuming
it was valid in the other respects in addition to its sequence number), and in
this case that would be as expected, as `T1` had previously succeeded.

Note that the duration that this race window in the current protocol remains
open can be lengthened (up to one minute) by the increase of any _one_ candidate
`closeTime`, since the current protocol combines candidate `closeTime`s by
choosing the maximum.  That means in particular that a single bad _validator_
can open this race window significantly, with the consequences including both
the failure of more transactions with `txTOO_LATE` and the potential for
inconsistent smart contract behavior.  This reflects that the current
protocol's choice of the maximum candidate `closeTime` is, in a sense, too
sensitive:  it can externalize a value that could have been manipulated by a
single bad actor.  We refer to such manipulation as "maximum `closeTime`
injection". The proposal in this CAP is less sensitive: a node can affect the
composite `closeTime` only if it manages to provide a transaction set that the
network as a whole selects as a composited one for the ballot protocol.  We
force a node to do a "good deed" (putting together a transaction set which the
compositing function selects over any other node's candidate) for the network's
clients in order to influence the eventual externalized `closeTime`. In the
presence of this CAP, one node's increasing the `closeTime` significantly no
longer triggers the smart-contract race because that is closed completely by
this CAP, and it no longer reduces the number of applicable transactions in a
ledger because the high `closeTime` provided by the bad actor does not affect
the validity of transactions in transaction sets proposed by other nodes.

### Detailed argument in favor of this proposal

Here we argue that this CAP would represent a clear improvement in behavior
by arguing individually for each of the semantic changes in the table above, in
the order presented (we shall use the "index" column for reference), so that the
desirability of the first change depends only on the state of the current
protocol and code, and the desirability of each further change may depend upon
that of earlier changes as well, in effect assuming that they have been made
because they are desirable (thus constructing an inductive argument for the
desirability of the whole CAP).

1. The first listed change was one of the optimizations made in PR 2608,
without requiring a protocol change (or, therefore, CAP), so we do not need to
argue for it in this CAP, but we explain it for context:  by estimating when
the next ledger will close and avoiding flooding any transactions which will
have expired by that time, we can save the network and memory resources that we
might have spent on behalf of transactions which were unlikely ever to be
applied anyway.  This CAP could be seen in part as propagating a similar style
of change to some later stages in the protocol; those changes _do_ require a
protocol upgrade.

2. The second listed decision point was changed in PR 2608, and we propose to
refine it further in this CAP.  The PR 2608 change was similar to the one made
in the first decision point 1, at a different place:  when we trim transactions
before choosing which `StellarValue` to nominate first when triggering a new
ledger.  The change had the same idea as the aforementioned one, to minimize the
use of resources on behalf of likely-useless transactions.  In this CAP, we
propose changing this decision point further to do the trimming based on the
exact `closeTime` that we are nominating.  Since the CAP behavior would allow us
to know that that would be the exact externalized `closeTime` if the transaction
set that we nominate were to be externalized, we know that that `closeTime` is
optimal to use for trimming against.  Knowing the optimal value, we no longer
need an estimate.  (The first decision point does not change because at that
point we do not yet know the rest of the `StellarValue` that we will end up
nominating -- in particular we do not yet know the `closeTime` -- so an estimate
is the best that we can do.)  And because that value is optimal -- all the
transactions that it leads to being trimmed would have been guaranteed to have
returned `txTOO_EARLY`/`txTOO_LATE` if the transaction set had been
externalized, and all the transactions that it leads to _not_ being trimmed are
guaranteed _not_ to return `txTOO_EARLY`/`txTOO_LATE` if the transaction set is
ultimately externalized -- it is clearly desirable to use it.

3. In the presence of change #2, which trims any premature/expired transactions
before nominating a `StellarValue`, it is only an ill-behaved node that would
nominate a `StellarValue` containing a transaction which is premature/expired
with respect to its own `closeTime`, so it becomes sensible for such a value to
fail validation. There is no loss in this, since we would not want to accept a
`StellarValue` from an ill-behaved node in any case; this change (given change
\#2) simply represents a strict improvement in our ability to detect a particular
incorrect behavior.

4. In the presence of change #3, any candidate transaction set passed in to
the compositing function consists only of transactions which are valid
with respect to the `closeTime` in the same `StellarValue` as the transaction
set.  Therefore, once the compositing function has chosen one of the candidate
transaction sets, the choice of a composited `closeTime` equal to the
`closeTime` in the same `StellarValue` as the chosen transaction set becomes
optimal in the following sense: it is precisely the latest `closeTime` with
respect to which all of the transactions in the chosen transaction set are
valid (unexpired). By comparison, the old protocol's choice of the maximal
`closeTime` of all candidates' is simply a loss:

    - It might render some of the transactions in the composited set expired,
      which is the `txTOO_LATE` race that motivated this CAP.

    - It might render some transactions still in the memory pools of some nodes
    expired, when they might have had a chance of getting into a future ledger
    if the `closeTime` had not been needlessly increased.

    - It makes the ledger close time more sensitive to the choice of a large
    `closeTime` by a single bad actor, which we have called the "maximum
    `closeTime` injection" problem, and discussed above in the "Detailed
    illustration of failure mode".

5. Given the ability to preserve the signature (since it is on a nominated
`<txSet,closeTime>` pair, of which we now choose a specific one rather than
combining multiple ones in producing the `closeTime`) in the output of the
compositing function, there is little cost to doing so (we have the signature
in memory and have already checked it), so we may as well lose as little
information as possible.  And given that we have preserved the signature on
`StellarValue`s throughout the nomination protocol and into the ballot protocol,
we must expect `SIGNED` `StellarValue`s in the ballot protocol, and we must
check the signatures again in the ballot protocol, to make sure that the
additional information that we are preserving is _correct_ information.  The
additional signature-checking, however, will be on a signature that we just
checked during the preceding nomination round, so we will likely simply hit in
cache nearly all the time, and not have to do significantly more signature
checks.

Therefore, we argue that each successive change represents a clear
improvement, given the previous one (and the first represents a clear
improvement over the existing implementation).

### Rejected alternatives

The proposal in this CAP is the third that we have considered as a means of
fixing the problems described in the "Motivation" section.  We record them here
to motivate the proposal that we later settled on for this CAP.

#### Deferring ledger time update until after applying transactions

The first idea was to change the point at which the current ledger header's
`closeTime` was updated from before transactions are applied to afterwards.
(Ledger `upgrades` are already performed after transaction applies.)  This
would prevent an increase in the `closeTime` brought about by candidates other
than the one whose transaction set was selected from causing transactions to
fail (it would not occur until after they had been applied).  However, this
raised the concern that sometimes transactions would be applied despite having
expiration times earlier than the close time of the ledger in which they were
committed -- and there would not even be any bound on how large the gap
between those times might be.  This CAP maintains the invariant that if a
transaction is applied, the close time of the ledger in which it is applied
falls within the time bounds of the transaction.

#### Trimming transactions rendered expired by combining nominated candidates

The second idea was to remove transactions from the composited transaction set
selected by the combine-candidates code in the nomination protocol, based on the
(maximal) `closeTime` just selected by that code. However, that would seem to
have opened up a new denial-of-service attack on the ledger:
an attacker could create large numbers of transactions with very high fees,
making it likely that they would be accepted into transaction sets, but with
extremely short expiration times, that would almost certainly come before the
next ledger close.  They could therefore fill up the transaction sets with
such transactions, yet avoid the transaction fees (the transactions would be
trimmed by the new code before fees were charged), leaving the transaction
sets produced by the nomination protocol with little or no room for legitimate
transactions.

### Reflections on rejected alternatives

Regarding the claim in the "Design Rationale" that "this CAP in general makes
changes to transaction set composition and validity in the earliest protocol
phases possible", note that from the first rejected alternative, to the second
rejected alternative, to the proposal in this CAP, the phase of the protocol at
which we have considered placing the new trimming and validating code has moved
earlier at each step.  The "detailed argument in favor" of this CAP also
proceeded change-by-change in order from earlier to later phases of the
consensus protocol.

### Aside: Changing the combining of `upgrades` is feasible, but unnecessary

Considering the `closeTime`-related changes in this CAP also raised a further
discussion: because the `SIGNED` `StellarValue`, besides the transaction set and
close time, also contains a set of ledger `upgrades`, we could choose
additionally to change `upgrades` to come from the single selected
`StellarValue` rather than being combined in a way similar to the `closeTime`s,
as they are in the current protocol.

Upgrades do happen independently of the transactions: we could view the ledger
closes as an optimization of alternating transaction set applies and ledger
upgrades. So we did have a free choice between proposing to change upgrades in
the same way as we were proposing to change closetime, or not doing so and
letting them work differently (single-candidate-selection for closetimes and
txsets, candidate-combination for upgrades).

There isn't any correlation that we've found among the different upgrades that
we combine, in the sense that today, if changing any given parameter `A` from
`1` to `2` and changing any given parameter `B` from `1` to `2` would each be
sensible individually, then it would also be sensible to make both changes at
once. But if the type of possible upgrades could expand to one in which certain
combinations of parameter changes would be insensible, then it might no longer
make sense just to combine each parameter individually -- the simple union of
individual changes could produce a result which was inconsistent. In that case,
the right way to combine them consistently would become ambiguous; there could
be multiple options of which none would include all candidate parameter changes.
Choosing the best single nominated set of upgrades might be the simplest way
of choosing a consistent composite of all candidate upgrades.

Overall, changing the selection of `upgrades` to match that of `closeTime`
could be said to make the resulting protocol simpler -- but it would make the
change for the CAP more complicated, and we haven't found any clear benefit to
making that further change.  (We did start with and do some testing of an
implementation that also changed `upgrades` selection, but in the latest
implementation we have undone that part and are changing only `closeTime`.)

## Backwards Incompatibilities

Semantic changes resulting from this CAP we hope to be limited to the
correction of undesirable aspects of the current protocol, such as the
potential inconsistency of smart contract behavior described in the
"Motivation", and not on any aspects of the protocol that well-behaved
clients could be _relying_ on (a well-behaved client should not _rely_ on a
potentially harmful race happening!).

## Security Concerns

So far, we have not found new potential issues with safety or denial-of-service
introduced by the proposal in this CAP, as we did with earlier ideas that we
then rejected, as described above in the "Design Rationale".

## Test Cases

- A test is added to confirm that when a node selects a `StellarValue`
to nominate, it trims from the selected transaction set precisely those
transactions which would be invalid according to the `closeTime` in that
`StellarValue`, and no others (in previous protocol versions, it should
continue to trim those which are invalid according to the last ledger close
time).

- A test is added to confirm that nominated `StellarValue`s are checked
for internal consistency between their close times and transaction sets --
that is, that they contain no transactions which are invalid according to
their own close times (a nominated `StellarValue` that does not meet that
condition should be rejected by other nodes).  (In old protocols, transactions
in a nominated `StellarValue` are checked for validity against the last ledger
close time.)

- A test is added to confirm that the new code which builds upon PR 2608
to allow a client to choose the `closeTime` to compare with a transaction's
`minTime` correctly alters which transactions are considered `txTOO_EARLY` and
which are not.  (PR 2608 introduced the option for clients to choose a
`closeTime` other than the last ledger close time to compare with a
transaction's `maxTime` when determining which transactions are considered
`txTOO_LATE`.)

- The existing test for the compositing/combining function, which confirms that
a set of candidate `StellarValue`s produces the expected composited `closeTime`,
changes in three ways:

  - It tests that old protocols continue to behave the same way, but that
  in new protocol versions, the composited `closeTime` is simply that of the
  `StellarValue` containing the best transaction set, not the maximum
  `closeTime` of all candidates.

  - It is enhanced to test for expected `upgrades` as well (but these should
  behave the same between old and new protocols; it just checks that the
  new protocol doesn't accidentally change this).

  - It tests that old nomination protocols produce `BASIC` `StellarValue`s, but
  new nomination protocols produce `SIGNED` ones.

- The existing tests which check that the `StellarValue` produced by the
  nomination protocol has the correct type changes to expect `BASIC`
  `StellarValue`s in old protocol versions, but `SIGNED` `StellarValue`s in new
  protocols.

## Implementation

An implementation of this protocol has been written, which as far as the
author knows is complete and correct in its semantics; it will certainly need
refactoring, but it might constitute a demonstration of the practicality of
implementing this proposal, and of a bound on the scope of the changes required,
as well as a way of experimenting with its consequences:

[Closetime change branch](https://github.com/rokopt/stellar-core/tree/proto-622-closetime)

The changes therein are limited to stellar-core, and comprise the following:

- The protocol version is bumped (currently anticipated to be to 14).

- The herder's choice of which transactions to include in the transaction set
that it is going to nominate to depend, in new protocols only, on the close
time that it is going to nominate, rather than (as in the current unreleased
code) an estimate of when the next ledger is likely to close or (as in the
released code) the last ledger close time.

- The herder's validation of `StellarValue`s nominated by other nodes changes
to expect, in new protocols only, that values used by the ballot protocol
are `SIGNED`.

- The herder's validation of `StellarValue`s nominated by other nodes changes
which `closeTime` to validate the transactions in the `StellarValue` against
from the last ledger close time to the `closeTime` in the `StellarValue`.

- The herder's compositing of candidate `StellarValue`s into a single value to
nominate, in new protocols only (it preserves its old behavior in old
protocols), changes in the following ways:

  - It chooses a composited `closeTime` directly from the `StellarValue`
  containing the selected transaction set.  In particular, it does not need
  any trimming of the selected transaction set.  (That set should already be
  consistent with `closeTime`, since it came from one nominated `StellarValue`,
  which the herder has already validated by the time it composites them.)

  - It returns `SIGNED` `StellarValue`s.

- Tests are modified and extended as described above under "Test Cases".
