## Preamble

```
CAP: 0064
Title: Memo Authorization for Soroban
Working Group:
    Owner: dmkozh@stellar.org
    Authors: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>
    Consulted: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
Status: Draft
Created: 2025-01-09
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/discussions/1610
Protocol version: 23
```

## Simple Summary

This CAP adds a new type of Soroban authorization payload that allows for signing the transaction memo.

## Working Group

As specified in the Preamble.

## Motivation

Standalone Soroban authorization payloads (those with `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS`, see [CAP-46-11](./cap-0046-11.md#authorization-payload-in-transaction) for details) for smart contract transactions are designed to be completely independent of the transaction envelope they belong to. This is done in order to support arbitrary custom multi-party authorization schemes that smart contracts may want to implement. As long as an authorization payload has been properly signed, it can be attached to any valid transaction. 

However, in some cases there may be a dependency between the transaction envelope and the inner authorization payload that currently can not be signed for. Specifically, transaction memos are often used to identify 'sub-destinations' within the actual destination account. This approach is often used by exchanges for attributing the incoming token transfers to specific exchange users.

Since custom accounts (smart wallets) require using `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` in order to sign any operations, it is currently not possible to e.g. sent token from a custom account balance to an exchange account. This is a common  procedure for off-ramp or CEX-based trading and thus not supporting it significantly hinders the adoption of custom accounts and requires unsafe workarounds (like using an intermediary classic Stellar account for performing the payment). Custom account adoption itself provides a way of improving the overall user experience of Stellar network.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

  - The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to create highly usable products.

## Abstract

This CAP introduces a new version of Soroban address credentials that allows users to specify a memo that the transaction must have in order for credentials to be valid for authorization. The new version of credentials doesn't supersede the existing one, i.e. protocol will support both versions.

## Specification

### XDR Changes

This patch of XDR changes is based on the XDR files in commit `a41b2db15ea34a9f9da5326b996bb8a7ceb5740f` of stellar-xdr.

```diff mddiffcheck.ignore=true
 Stellar-ledger-entries.x |  3 ++-
 Stellar-transaction.x    | 27 ++++++++++++++++++++++++++-
 2 files changed, 28 insertions(+), 2 deletions(-)

diff --git a/Stellar-ledger-entries.x b/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
index 5bf4f9d..f0bf9ea 100644
--- a/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
+++ b/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
@@ -676,7 +676,8 @@ enum EnvelopeType
     ENVELOPE_TYPE_OP_ID = 6,
     ENVELOPE_TYPE_POOL_REVOKE_OP_ID = 7,
     ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID = 8,
-    ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION = 9
+    ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION = 9,
+    ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION_V2 = 10
 };
 
 enum BucketListType
diff --git a/Stellar-transaction.x b/Stellar-transaction.x
index 7d32481..763531c 100644
--- a/Stellar-transaction.x
+++ b/Stellar-transaction.x
@@ -569,10 +569,22 @@ struct SorobanAddressCredentials
     SCVal signature;
 };
 
+struct SorobanAddressCredentialsV2
+{
+    ExtensionPoint ext;
+
+    SCAddress address;
+    int64 nonce;
+    Memo txMemo;
+    uint32 signatureExpirationLedger;    
+    SCVal signature;
+};
+
 enum SorobanCredentialsType
 {
     SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT = 0,
-    SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS = 1
+    SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS = 1,
+    SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS_V2 = 2
 };
 
 union SorobanCredentials switch (SorobanCredentialsType type)
@@ -581,6 +593,8 @@ case SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT:
     void;
 case SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS:
     SorobanAddressCredentials address;
+case SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS_V2:
+    SorobanAddressCredentialsV2 addressV2;
 };
 
 /* Unit of authorization data for Soroban.
@@ -729,6 +743,17 @@ case ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION:
         uint32 signatureExpirationLedger;
         SorobanAuthorizedInvocation invocation;
     } sorobanAuthorization;
+case ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION_V2:
+    struct
+    {
+        ExtensionPoint ext;
+
+        Hash networkID;
+        int64 nonce;
+        uint32 signatureExpirationLedger;
+        SorobanAuthorizedInvocation invocation;
+        Memo txMemo;
+    } sorobanAuthorizationV2;
 };
 
 enum MemoType
-- 
```

### Semantics

#### `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS_V2` credentials

A new type of of address credentials is introduced for `SorobanAuthorizationEntry`: `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS_V2` of type `SorobanAddressCredentialsV2`. The semantics of the new credentials is identical to the semantics of `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` defined by [CAP-46-11](./cap-0046-11.md#authorization-payload-in-transaction) with the following exceptions:

- During the authorization process the value of `txMemo` field is validated against the memo of the transaction being executed. In case of a mismatch, the authorization is considered to have failed.
- SHA-256 hash of `ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION_V2` envelope must be signed instead of `ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION` envelope used for `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` signatures. The envelope is built using the respectively named fields from `SorobanAddressCredentialsV2`, and the target network id that the authorization has to be used for.
- No-op extension point has been added for the future extensions to both the authorization entry and the envelope

#### `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` credentials remain supported

The first version of the credentials will still be supported by the protocol. It can be considered to be semantically equivalent to `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS_V2` with `txMemo` set to `MEMO_NONE` (i.e. it may only pass authorization check when the transaction memo is `MEMO_NONE`).

## Design Rationale

The design is simply the minimal necessary set of changes that allows for signing transaction memos. We had to come up with the new XDR structures because the initial versions did not have any extension points. In order to simplify potential future changes, the extension point has been introduced as well.

### Muxed accounts are not supported

Muxed accounts are an alternative to transaction memos and serve a similar purpose of defining off-chain sub-accounts for the actual accounts. However, they don't align with the change proposed by this CAP due to the following reasons:

- When a muxed account is a source account of a transaction or operation, it defines the source (not the destination) of a transfer and thus the main motivational use case of supporting exchange transfers is not covered by that.
- Muxed account can not be a destination of any Soroban operation because `ScAddress` doesn't allow expressing muxed accounts.

We may consider supporting muxed accounts more holistically as an address type in the future CAPs, but that falls out of scope of this particular change.

### No additional transaction fields are supported

There are other transaction fields (currently preconditions and Soroban resources data), that could in theory also be signed as a part of Soroban authorization payloads. However, unlike memos, these fields are normally not used for any sort of identification and provide functionality that can already be replicated in Soroban to some degree. For example, all the Soroban authorization entries must have signature expiration ledger and there is no particular need for also tying the signature to the preconditions of the external transaction. Soroban resources can't be signed at all, as they may depend on the signature itself.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition
 
As soon as this CAP becomes active, validators will start accepting the transactions with `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS_V2` credentials and performing the corresponding authorization checks.

### Backwards Incompatibilities

The old credentials format is still accepted and thus no backwards incompatibilities are expected.

### Resource Utilization

There is no measurable impact on resource utilization.

## Security Concerns

This CAP doesn't raise any new security concerns.

## Future work

Support for muxed accounts in Soroban or Soroban-specific multiplexed addresses might be done in the future, given the real use cases and demand.

## Test Cases

TBD

## Implementation

TBD
