## Preamble

```
CAP: 0059
Title: Host functions for BLS12-381
Working Group:
    Owner: Jay Geng <@jayz22>
    Authors: Jay Geng <@jayz22>
    Consulted: TBD
Status: Draft
Created: 2024-08-15
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/discussions/1500
Protocol version: 22
```

## Simple Summary
BLS12-381 is a pairing-friendly elliptic curve which enables a new suite of applications. This CAP proposes a set of new host functions providing access to BLS12-381 curve operations.

## Working Group

As described in the preamble section.

## Motivation
Pairing friendly elliptic curve operations are the backbone of many advanced Zero Knowledge (ZK) constructions such as as zkSNARKs, zkSTARKs, PLONK, BLS Signatures and more. These, in turn, enable a wide array of applications ranging from scaling, to identity management and privacy. BLS12-381 is one of the most well-known and widely adopted pairing friendly curves, due to its efficiency and 128-bit security. However, the curve operations are inherently computationally intensive, making them prohibitive to be implemented in a smart contract. Providing an efficient implementation for a well-chosen set of curve and field operations natively inside the Soroban host is crucial for unlocking privacy-preserving applications in smart contracts.

### Goals Alignment
This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

  - The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects
    to create highly usable products

## Abstract
11 new host functions are proposed for performing field and curve operations on BLS12-381. Definitions and the semantics of each new host function, as well as the associated new metering parameters, will be introduced and explained. 

## Specification

### New host functions
```
{
    "export": "4",
    "name": "bls12_381_g1_add",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "point1",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "point2",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Adds two BLS12-381 G1 points given in bytes format and returns the resulting G1 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "5",
    "name": "bls12_381_g1_mul",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "point",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "scalar",
            "type": "U256Val"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Multiplies a BLS12-381 G1 point by a scalar, and returns the resulting G1 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "6",
    "name": "bls12_381_g1_msm",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "vp",
            "type": "VecObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "vs",
            "type": "VecObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Performs multi-scalar-multiplication (inner product) on a vector of BLS12-381 G1 points by a vector of scalars, and returns the resulting G1 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "7",
    "name": "bls12_381_map_fp_to_g1",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "fp",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Maps a BLS12-381 field element to G1 point.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "8",
    "name": "bls12_381_hash_to_g1",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "msg",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Hashes a message to a BLS12-381 G1 point given in bytes format and returns the resulting G1 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "9",
    "name": "bls12_381_g2_add",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "point1",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "point2",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Adds two BLS12-381 G2 points given in bytes format and returns the resulting G2 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "a",
    "name": "bls12_381_g2_mul",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "point",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "scalar",
            "type": "U256Val"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Multiplies a BLS12-381 G2 point by a scalar, and returns the resulting G2 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "b",
    "name": "bls12_381_g2_msm",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "vp",
            "type": "VecObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "vs",
            "type": "VecObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Performs multi-scalar-multiplication (inner product) on a BLS12-381 G2 point by a vector of scalars, and returns the resulting G2 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "c",
    "name": "bls12_381_map_fp2_to_g2",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "fp2",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Maps a BLS12-381 field element to G2 point.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "d",
    "name": "bls12_381_hash_to_g2",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "msg",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Hashes a message to a BLS12-381 G2 point given in bytes format and returns the resulting G2 point in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "e",
    "name": "bls12_381_pairing",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "p1",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "p2",
            "type": "BytesObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "BytesObject",
    "docs": "Performs pairing operation on a BLS12-381 G1 point and a G2 point, both given in bytes format, and returns the resulting pairing in bytes format.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
},
{
    "export": "e",
    "name": "bls12_381_multi_pairing_check",
    "args": [
        {
            "name": "vp1",
            "type": "VecObject"
        },
        {
            "name": "vp2",
            "type": "VecObject"
        }
    ],
    "return": "Bool",
    "docs": "Performs pairing operation on a vector of G1 and a vector of G2 points, return true if the result equals 1.",
    "min_supported_protocol": 22
}
```

### XDR changes

```
diff --git a/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x b/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x
index 52cc022..0ee9b6b 100644
--- a/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x
+++ b/Stellar-contract-config-setting.x
@@ -188,7 +188,38 @@ enum ContractCostType {
     // point on a 256-bit elliptic curve
     Sec1DecodePointUncompressed = 43,
     // Cost of verifying an ECDSA Secp256r1 signature
-    VerifyEcdsaSecp256r1Sig = 44
+    VerifyEcdsaSecp256r1Sig = 44,
+
+    // Cost of encoding a BLS12-381 Fp (base field element)
+    Bls12381EncodeFp = 45,
+    // Cost of decoding a BLS12-381 Fp (base field element)
+    Bls12381DecodeFp = 46,
+    // Cost of converting a BLS12-381 G1 point from projective to affine coordinates
+    Bls12381G1ProjectiveToAffine = 47,
+    // Cost of converting a BLS12-381 G2 point from projective to affine coordinates
+    Bls12381G2ProjectiveToAffine = 48,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 G1 point addition
+    Bls12381G1Add = 49,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 G1 scalar multiplication
+    Bls12381G1Mul = 50,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 G1 multi-scalar multiplication (MSM)
+    Bls12381G1Msm = 51,
+    // Cost of mapping a BLS12-381 Fp field element to a G1 point
+    Bls12381MapFpToG1 = 52,
+    // Cost of hashing to a BLS12-381 G1 point
+    Bls12381HashToG1 = 53,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 G2 point addition
+    Bls12381G2Add = 54,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 G2 scalar multiplication
+    Bls12381G2Mul = 55,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 G2 multi-scalar multiplication (MSM)
+    Bls12381G2Msm = 56,
+    // Cost of mapping a BLS12-381 Fp2 field element to a G2 point
+    Bls12381MapFp2ToG2 = 57,
+    // Cost of hashing to a BLS12-381 G2 point
+    Bls12381HashToG2 = 58,
+    // Cost of performing BLS12-381 pairing operation
+    Bls12381Pairing = 59
 };

```

### Semantics

#### Field and groups

`fp` - field element in the base field. Encoding rule: big-endian encoding of the underlying unsigned 48-byte integer.
`fp2`- field element in the quadratic extension of the base prime field. Encoding rule: concatenation of the two encoded-components `c0` and `c1` i.e. `encode(c0) || encode(c1)`
`fp12` - field element in the 12-degree prime extension field. This is the output from the pairing operation. `fp12` is only used as intermediary and encoding is not needed.
`fr` - scalar. A scalar has maximum length of 32 bytes. Encoding rule: big-endian encoding of the underlying unsigned 32-byte integer.
`G1` - group containing points over the base prime field that satisfy the curve equation, plus point at infinity. Encoding rule: concatenation of the two encoded-coordinates (uncompressed form), each being an `fp`, i.e. `encoding(p) = encoding(p.x) || encoding(p.y)`
`G2` - group containing points over the quadratic extension of the base prime field that satisfy the curve equation, plus the point at infinity. Encoding rule: concatenation of the two encoded-coordinates (uncompressed form), each being an `fp2`, i.e. `encoding(p) = encoding(p.x) || encoding(p.y)`

#### New host functions introduced

- `bls12_381_g1_add` - perform point addition in G1. Cost: covers the cost of de-serializing G1 points, conversion of G1 point from projective to affine space `Bls12381G1ProjectiveToAffine`, point addition `Bls12381G1Add` and deserializing the resulting `G1` point. 
- `bls12_381_g1_mul` - perform scalar multiplication in G1. Cost: includes G1 point de-serialization, scalar deserialization, point multiplication `Bls12381G1Mul`, converting the point from project to affine and serialization
- `bls12_381_g1_msm` - perform multi-scalar-multiplication (MSM) in G1. Cost: includes deserialization of the G1 vector, the scalar vector, and the MSM operation `Bls12381G1Msm`, and serialization of the resulting G1 point. Errors: if the two vectors have different lengths, or the length is zero.
- `bls12_381_map_fp_to_g1` - maps an `fp` to a point in `G1`. Cost includes deserialization of the G1 point, the mapping cost `Bls12381MapFpToG1`, and serialization of the resulting G1 point.
- `bls12_381_hash_to_g1` - hashes a message (a sequence of bytes) into a point in `G1`. Cost is covered by `Bls12381HashToG1`. The domain separation tag (dst) is "Soroban-V00-CS00-with-BLS12381G1_XMD:SHA-256_SSWU_RO_".
- `bls12_381_g2_add` - perform point addition in G2. Cost: covers the cost of de-serializing G2 points, conversion of G2 point from projective to affine space `Bls12381G2ProjectiveToAffine`, point addition `Bls12381G2Add` and deserializing the resulting `G2` point. 
- `bls12_381_g2_mul` - perform scalar multiplication in G2. Cost: includes G2 point de-serialization, scalar deserialization, point multiplication `Bls12381G2Mul`, converting the point from project to affine and serialization
- `bls12_381_g2_msm` - multi-scalar-multiplication (MSM) in G2. The cost includes deserialization of the G2 vector, the scalar vector, and the MSM operation `Bls12381G2Msm`, and serialization of the resulting G2 point. Errors: if the two vectors have different lengths, or the length is zero.
- `bls12_381_map_fp2_to_g2` - maps an `fp2` to a point in `G2`. Cost includes deserialization of the G2 point, the mapping cost `Bls12381MapFpToG2`, and serialization of the resulting G2 point.
- `bls12_381_hash_to_g2` - hashes an message (a sequence of bytes) into a point in `G2`. Cost is covered by `Bls12381HashToG2`. The domain separation tag (dst) is "Soroban-V00-CS00-with-BLS12381G2_XMD:SHA-256_SSWU_RO_".
- `bls12_381_multi_pairing_check` - performs pairing operation on a vector of `G1` and a vector of `G2` points, return true if the result equals `1_fp12`. Cost includes deserialization of the point vectors (in G1 and G2 respectively), cost of pairing `Bls12381Pairing`.

#### New metering `CostType`s introduced
- `Bls12381EncodeFp` - Cost of encoding a BLS12-381 Fp (base field element). Encoding includes the necessary conversion (e.g. Montgomery reduction) from the internal representation into integer form, and serialization into bytes. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381DecodeFp` - Cost of decoding a BLS12-381 Fp (base field element). Decoding includes deserialization from bytes into integer, and the necessary conversion (e.g. Montgomery multiplication) from the integer form to the internal representation. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G1ProjectiveToAffine` - Cost of converting a BLS12-381 G1 point from projective to affine coordinates. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G2ProjectiveToAffine` - Cost of converting a BLS12-381 G2 point from projective to affine coordinates. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G1Add` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 G1 point addition. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G1Mul` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 G1 scalar multiplication. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G1Msm` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 G1 multi-scalar multiplication (MSM). Type: linear w.r.t the length of the input vectors. 
- `Bls12381MapFpToG1` - Cost of mapping a BLS12-381 Fp field element to a G1 point. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381HashToG1` - Cost of hashing to a BLS12-381 G1 point. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G2Add` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 G2 point addition. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G2Mul` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 G2 scalar multiplication. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381G2Msm` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 G2 multi-scalar multiplication (MSM). Type: linear w.r.t the length of the input vectors. 
- `Bls12381MapFp2ToG2` - Cost of mapping a BLS12-381 Fp2 field element to a G2 point. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381HashToG2` - Cost of hashing to a BLS12-381 G2 point. Type: constant.
- `Bls12381Pairing` - Cost of performing BLS12-381 pairing operation. Type: linear w.r.t to the length of the input vectors.

## Design Rationale

### Function list choice
The list of host functions follows closely what has been proposed in [eip-2537](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-2537), and has been adopted by Ethereum, with many proven ZKP use cases. 

The proposed list includes two additional "hash to curve" functions which performs hashing arbitrary message to curve points: `bls12_381_hash_to_g1` and `bls12_381_hash_to_g2`, which follow the IETF hash-to-curve standard as specified in [rfc9380](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc9380/).

#### `U256Val` for scalar
All field and group elements mentioned in the host functions are represented as `BytesObject`, with encoding rule specified in [fields and groups](#field-and-groups), except for the scalar element. Since the scalar can be up to 32-bytes, with same semantics as an unsigned integer, using `U256Val` is the natural choice. Extracting bytes in the correct format can be tricky and error prone, depending on the underlying implementation (for example it is common for field elements implementations to store the montgomery backend number for better computation efficiency, extracting the bytes require performing the reduction first). Using `U256Val` also takes advantage of the internal small value optimization which reduces storage space for small numbers, see [value type repertoire](cap-0046-01.md/#rationale-for-value-and-object-type-repertoires).

#### No plain "pairing" function
The multi-pairing-check function is provided in instead of a direct pairing function. This is also inline with the choice of eip-2537. 

Most applications requiring pairing also performs comparison of pairing results, such as BLS signature verification, or verification of zk-SNARKs. The pairing comparison `e(a, b) == e(c, d)` can be converted to a multi-pairing evaluation of `e(a, b) * e(-c, d) == 1`. The main benefit is cost saving, since final exponentiation (the most expensive part of pairing) only needs to be performed on the final result. Not providing the plain pairing function also simplifies the host interface, since it eliminates the need to serialize and return the pairing result in `fp12`, which is 576 bytes long, and prevents contract from unknowingly opting into the expensive pattern (in terms of both compute and storage).

### Choice of the cost types
The new metering [cost types](#new-metering-costtypes-introduced) broadly follow the selection criteria outlined in [cap-0046-10](cap-0046-10.md). The set is designed to efficiently represent distinct, non-overlapping units of computation, ensuring optimal separation of work components.

#### Encode/Decode
The only two cost types representing encoding/decoding are of the base field element `Bls12381EncodeFp` and `Bls12381DecodeFp`, since all field and group elements can be composed of the base elements. (En)Decoding `G1` is (en)decoding two `fp` separately, same for `fp2`. `G2` contains two `fp2`, that are (en)decoded separately. `fr` is also represented as a field element of a less order, thus (en)decoding work is strictly less than on an `fp` (and thus okay to use `fp` as an moderate overestimation for it).

## Protocol Upgrade Transition
The proposed host functions will become available protocol 22, i.e. with `"min_supported_protocol": 22` in the interface definition. For `protocol_version <= 21`, attempting to import any of these function definitions in the WASM will lead to a linking error during Vm instantiation time. 

### Backwards Incompatibilities
This CAP does not introduce any backward incompatibilities.

### Resource Utilization
The performance impact of the new host functions have been captured by the new `CostType` described above. The cpu and memory consumption need to be calibrated carefully on each new `CostType` to ensure that the cost of running BLS host functions are metered properly and subject to the network limits. Final calibration numbers are TBD.

## Security Concerns
The main security concerns include
- Logic correctness. The proposed set of functions cover a wide range of cryptographic operations, which rely on correctness of 3rd party implementations. Incorrect implementation or failure to cover certain corner case potentially be exploitable vulnerabilities. 
- Denial of service. Since the proposed operations are computationally intensive, failure to properly calibrate any part, or to properly account for an extra-expensive path, could lead to the actual computation time significantly exceeding the metered costs, thus potentially lead to denial of service. 

## Test Cases
TBD

## Implementation

An initial prototype of BLS12-381 host functions, SDK, and an example custom account contract with BLS signature has been implemented: 
- env-prototype: https://github.com/jayz22/rs-soroban-env/tree/bls12-318-field-arithmetic
- sdk-prototype (linking to the env prototype above): https://github.com/jayz22/rs-soroban-sdk/tree/bls12-318-field-arithmetic
- BLS-signature custom account example: https://github.com/jayz22/soroban-examples/tree/bls-signature/bls_signature
