## Preamble

```
CAP: 0046-09
Title: Network Configuration Ledger Entries
Working Group:
    Owner: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>
    Authors: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>, Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
    Consulted:
Status: Final
Created: 2022-11-01
Discussion:
Protocol version: 20
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal defines a new ledger entry type to store various network-wide
configuration and a way to upgrade such configuration entries.

## Motivation and Goals Alignment

See the Soroban overview CAP for overall Soroban motivation.

The configuration entries in particular are motivated by the need to store a
large amount of Soroban-related configuration, such as the host function
metering data, contract fee structure, contract size limits etc. Currently the
network-wide configuration is only stored in the `LedgerHeader`, which would be
infeasible to use given that the Soroban-related information may require tens
of kilobytes of space to be stored.


## Abstract

This CAP introduces a special type of configuration `LedgerEntry` that can only
be modified via a validator vote. It also specifies the general rules for adding
and modifying these entries.

## Specification

### XDR

See the XDR diffs in the Soroban overview CAP, specifically those referring to
the `ConfigSettingEntry`,`ConfigUpgradeSet`, and `ConfigUpgradeSetKey`.

### Configuration settings entries

This CAP adds a general mechanism for validators to store and update
configuration settings using ledger upgrades. The smart contracts require a
significant amount of configuration related to fees and metering and hence this
CAP accounts for large and complex configuration settings.

In order to prevent bloating of the `LedgerHeader` the settings are stored in
the ledger as a new type of `LedgerEntry`: `ConfigSettingEntry`. Every
`ConfigSettingEntry` is uniquely identified by its type (`ConfigSettingID`) and
hence at most one entry of each type may exist in the ledger. Setting entries
are represented by arbitrary XDR.

`ConfigSettingID` and its corresponding payload should correspond to an 'atomic'
set of configuration settings, i.e. those that are expected to be used and
upgraded together. For example, contract size limit, metering data and fee data
would all be represented by the separate entries (or more granular entries if
needed).

#### Adding and removing setting entries

New settings may only be introduced during the protocol version upgrades. Every
CAP introducing the new setting must also define its default value to be used
during the protocol version upgrade. When the upgrade happens, all the new
settings defined for the upgrade are created in the ledger with respective
default values.

Removal of the setting types could happen during the protocol version upgrade
too. However, given that the footprint of a single ledger entry is negligible
at the scale of ledger, there is really no need to maintain the removal
mechanism. Not being able to remove the setting by accident is also safer, as
the settings are fundamental components to any functionality needing them.
Hence this CAP assumes the settings are always persisted in the ledger after
they are introduced (similar to e.g. `LedgerHeader` parameters).

### Configuration upgrade mechanism

Every configuration setting entry is considered to be atomic for the sake of the
upgrade, i.e. an upgrade must provide the full XDR of the setting, even if it
is only being partially updated. This is done to simplify the upgrade format
(otherwise we'd need to introduce some key-value mechanism of specifying
upgraded fields).

Multiple configuration setting entries may be upgraded at once using a
`ConfigUpgradeSet` struct that contains all the updated `ConfigSettingEntry`
entries. The `LedgerUpgrade` in `StellarValue` that validators will vote on will
contain only an `ConfigUpgradeSetKey`, which containts a contractID, and the
SHA-256 hash of the `ConfigUpgradeSet`. The actual `ConfigUpgradeSet` will need
to exist on ledger in a `ContractDataEntry`, and the validators will look it up
using the `ConfigUpgradeSetKey`. This means that a Wasm contract will need to be
used to write the proposed upgrade. The specs of the entry written is as follows -
- It should be a `TEMPORARY` entry, so make sure it's bumped to live long enough for the upgrade.
- The `SCVal` `key` should be of type `SCV_BYTES`, where the value is the SHA-256 hash of the `ConfigUpgradeSet`.
- The `SCVal` `val` should also be of type `SCV_BYTES`, where the value is the
  serialized XDR of the `ConfigUpgradeSet`.
  
Once the proposed upgrade is setup, you'll need to share the
`ConfigUpgradeSetKey` with the other validators so they can vote for it. Note
that the validators will verify that the hash in `ConfigUpgradeSetKey` matches
the hash of the upgrade stored in the `ContractDataEntry`, and will only vote
for upgrades that follow this rule. Validators should however still apply any
valid hash the network accepts (even if that specific validator didn't vote for
the upgrade).

#### `ConfigUpgradeSet` validation

`ConfigUpgradeSet` is considered valid when:

- all the `updatedEntry` values have unique `configSettingID` values 
- `updateEntry` are ordered by the integer values of the `ConfigSettingID` enum
- every `updatedEntry` is valid itself

Individual config settings are validated in the way defined by the CAPs
introducing them.

#### Disabling Soroban Transactions

The submission of Soroban transactions can be disabled by setting
`ConfigSettingContractExecutionLanesV0::ledgerMaxTxCount` to 0 in under the
`ConfigSettingID` `CONFIG_SETTING_CONTRACT_EXECUTION_LANES`. Doing this will
lock the validators out from creating config setting upgrades using Wasm
contracts, which means the `ConfigUpgradeSet` mechanism cannot be used to
re-enable Soroban.

To allow increasing `ledgerMaxTxCount` from 0, we introduce the ability to set
the value using the traditional upgrade mechanism. There's a new `LedgerUpgrade`
type `LEDGER_UPGRADE_MAX_SOROBAN_TX_SET_SIZE`, which contains a `uint32
newMaxSorobanTxSetSize` to update
`ConfigSettingContractExecutionLanesV0::ledgerMaxTxCount`.

#### Minimum values

The protocol should define minimum values for every upgradeable config setting
so that it should always be possible to install a contract (assuming
`ledgerMaxTxCount` isn't 0) that saves enough state to write the largest
`ConfigUpgradeEntry` to allow for any config setting upgrade. Any CAP that
introduces a new case under `ConfigSettingEntry` should also define the minimum
values.

## Resource Utilization

No substantial changes to resource utilization are expected, including the
upgrade events.

## Security Concerns

Compared to the existing ledger upgrades that normally are limited to very
simple changes like bumping the protocol version, the configuration upgrades to
schedule are much harder to review from the validator perspective. It's also
not plausible that every validator would do complex operations like host
function cost calibration. Hence the upgrade sets to nominate have to be
distributed via the trusted and secure channels. Both these issues increase the
risks of applying a malicious upgrade to the network (for example by
distributing it to validators as an impersonated trusted party). Although the
influence scope of such a malicious upgrade would be reasonably limited and
likely concern only the Smart Contracts.
