```
CAP: 0086
Title: Host functions for sparse Symbol-keyed map creation and unpacking
Working Group:
    Owner: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>
    Authors: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Consulted: 
Status: Final Comment Period
Created: 2026-07-08
Discussion: https://github.com/orgs/stellar/discussions/1877
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

Introduce new host functions that support data migration for map-based Soroban UDTs.

## Working Group

As specified in the Preamble.

## Motivation

The de facto standard Soroban UDT `contracttype` structs implementation is based on a `MapObject` with `Symbol` keys, backed by the two host functions `map_new_from_linear_memory` and `map_unpack_to_linear_memory` that allow converting UDT structs to and from `MapObject`s, respectively. However, these host functions do strict validation and cause the contract call to trap if the input/output map doesn't *exactly* match the expected schema (i.e. if it doesn't have the exact same keys as the struct). This makes it impossible to migrate UDTs to a new schema, because the new schema may have additional keys or may omit some of the old keys.

This is problematic for most UDT-based data migration scenarios:

  - A contract may need to add a new field to a UDT struct or remove an old unused field when its implementation is updated. There are known cases where this has rendered contracts unusable after an update.
  - A struct used in a function interface may need to evolve, but cannot be updated unless all interface-user contracts are updated atomically, which is not feasible if multiple contract instances share the same interface.
  - A contract may want to verify that a map matches an expected schema without manually iterating it, but the existing host functions trap on any error instead of returning gracefully.

  All of these issues are *technically* avoidable by either very careful planning of the UDT schema (with some combination of manual versioning and enums), or by implementing a custom map serialization/deserialization logic in the contract code, which requires developers to bypass the existing standard SDK and host functions. Both options are non-obvious and error-prone, and the latter option is also inefficient and requires more code to be written and maintained.

  Thus this CAP proposes to provide a new standard way of manipulating the UDTs efficiently and in a migration-friendly manner.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

  - The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to create highly usable products

## Abstract

Two new host functions are introduced: `sparse_map_new_from_linear_memory` and `sparse_map_unpack_to_linear_memory`. They are mostly similar to the existing host functions `map_new_from_linear_memory` and `map_unpack_to_linear_memory`, but they have more relaxed schema validation rules. Specifically, if the expected key is not present in the map, it will be fetched as `Void` value (which maps to `None` in the UDTs), and the `Void` values are never explicitly stored in the map. `sparse_map_unpack_to_linear_memory` also allows fetching only a subset of the map keys.

## Specification

### New host functions

The diff is based on commit `5538f572f1a68cb6a4bc2182e23e2f6e1ddd4520` of `rs-soroban-env`.

```diff mddiffcheck.ignore=true
diff --git a/soroban-env-common/env.json b/soroban-env-common/env.json
index fa41a862..8e8c6d14 100644
--- a/soroban-env-common/env.json
+++ b/soroban-env-common/env.json
@@ -1047,7 +1047,7 @@
                         }
                     ],
                     "return": "MapObject",
-                    "docs": "Return a new map initialized from a pair of equal-length arrays, one for keys and one for values, given by a pair of linear-memory addresses and a length in Vals."
+                    "docs": "Return a new map initialized from a pair of equal `len` length arrays, one for keys and one for values, specified by linear memory addresses. Keys must be sorted in ascending order and have `Symbol` type, values may be arbitrary `Val`s. If the keys are not sorted in the ascending order, or if the arrays have different lengths, the function panics."
                 },
                 {
                     "export": "a",
@@ -1071,7 +1071,53 @@
                         }
                     ],
                     "return": "Void",
-                    "docs": "Copy Vals from `map` to the array `vals_pos`, selecting only the keys identified by the array `keys_pos`. Both arrays have `len` elements and are identified by linear-memory addresses."
+                    "docs": "Copy all value `Val`s from `map` to the linear memory array at `vals_pos` address. Map keys must match the `Symbol` keys in the linear memory array at `keys_pos` address, keys array must be sorted in the ascending order, and both arrays and the map must have `len` elements, or else the function panics."
+                },
+                {
+                    "export": "b",
+                    "name": "sparse_map_new_from_linear_memory",
+                    "args": [
+                        {
+                            "name": "keys_pos",
+                            "type": "U32Val"
+                        },
+                        {
+                            "name": "vals_pos",
+                            "type": "U32Val"
+                        },
+                        {
+                            "name": "len",
+                            "type": "U32Val"
+                        }
+                    ],
+                    "return": "MapObject",
+                    "docs": "Return a new map initialized from a pair of equal `len` length arrays, one for keys and one for values, specified by linear memory addresses. Keys must be sorted in ascending order and have `Symbol` type, values may be arbitrary `Val`s. Key-value pairs where the value is `Void` are skipped. If the keys are not sorted, or if the arrays have different lengths, the function panics.",
+                    "min_supported_protocol": 28
+                },
+                {
+                    "export": "c",
+                    "name": "sparse_map_unpack_to_linear_memory",
+                    "args": [
+                        {
+                            "name": "map",
+                            "type": "MapObject"
+                        },
+                        {
+                            "name": "keys_pos",
+                            "type": "U32Val"
+                        },
+                        {
+                            "name": "vals_pos",
+                            "type": "U32Val"
+                        },
+                        {
+                            "name": "len",
+                            "type": "U32Val"
+                        }
+                    ],
+                    "return": "Void",
+                    "docs": "Copy all value `Val`s from `map` to the linear memory array at `vals_pos` address. Only map keys corresponding to the `Symbol` keys in the linear memory array at `keys_pos` address are copied, and `Void` values are written for keys not present in the map. Keys array must be sorted in the ascending order, and both arrays must have `len` elements, or else the function panics.",
+                    "min_supported_protocol": 28
                 }
             ]
         },
```

Note that the documentation changes to the existing host functions are purely cosmetic and do not change the semantics of the functions, but instead document their behavior more precisely, so that the difference between the existing and new host functions is more clear.

### Semantics

#### `sparse_map_new_from_linear_memory` function

`sparse_map_new_from_linear_memory` host function fetches the `len` elements from the linear memory starting at `keys_pos` and `vals_pos` addresses, zips them into key-value pairs, and creates a new map with the fetched key-value pairs, skipping any pairs where the value is `Void`. The resulting map is returned.

Keys array must consist of `Symbol` values sorted in the ascending order. Values array may contain arbitrary `Val`s. If the keys are not sorted in the ascending order (or any required element is not a `Symbol`), the function panics.

#### `sparse_map_unpack_to_linear_memory` function

`sparse_map_unpack_to_linear_memory` host function fetches the `len` elements from the linear memory starting at `keys_pos` address, and for each key, it fetches the corresponding value from the map. If the key is not present in the map, the function writes `Void` value to the output array. The resulting values are written to the linear memory starting at `vals_pos` address, with the value at index `i` corresponding to the key at index `i`. Unlike `map_unpack_to_linear_memory`, the function does not try to verify that every key in the map has been fetched.

Keys array must consist of `Symbol` values sorted in the ascending order. If the keys are not sorted in the ascending order (or any required element is not a `Symbol`), the function panics.

## Design Rationale

### New host functions vs changing the old host functions

The new host functions have exactly the same interface as the existing ones, and there is a consideration to change the behavior of the existing host functions on the protocol boundary, instead of introducing new host functions.

This approach has a benefit of every existing contract to benefit from the new behavior to some degree (as long as they are using the `Option` fields or just need the ability to not fetch every key from the map). However, there is a subtle risk of performing this change unconditionally: if a contract does actually rely on the strict schema validation for safety, the protocol upgrade would break the assumptions around that, and the contract may become vulnerable to some attacks. It's quite unlikely that it would happen in practice, but we chose to err on the side of caution here.

SDK may adopt the new host functions as soon as they're available, and then the developers will be able to use the migration-friendly behavior in a more explicit way - even if there are some subtle issues with the new logic, they will be able to test it first before mainnet deployment (unlike in case of an unconditional change of the existing host functions).

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

The proposed functionality will be available starting from protocol version TBD.

### Backwards Incompatibilities

There are no backwards incompatibilities introduced by this CAP.

### Resource Utilization

The new host functions are going to be metered using the existing metering primitives. No other resource utilization changes are expected.

## Security Concerns

As mentioned in the Design Rationale section, the new host functions are more permissive than the existing ones. However, given that the change requires developers to rebuild their contracts with the new version of the SDK, the subtle validation behavior expectations may be tested and manual verification may be added if necessary.

## Test Cases

TBD

## Implementation

TBD

## Appendix: UDT migration examples

While UDTs are technically not in the CAP scope, the following examples illustrate how UDTs that use the new host functions can be used to perform data migration.

### Adding new storage fields to a UDT struct

Consider a contract that has the following UDT struct for storing the admin information:

```rust
#[contracttype]
struct AdminInfo {
    admin: Address,
    is_frozen: bool,
}
```

In an updated version the contract wants to support multiple admins. This can be achieved by adding a new field to the struct:

```rust
#[contracttype]
struct AdminInfo {
    admin: Address, // deprecated
    is_frozen: bool,    
    admins: Option<Vec<Address>>,
}
```

This struct is compatible with the old struct, and the new field `admins` can be initialized with the existing `admin` field value after the update or on first access. In the later update, the `admin` field can be removed from the struct completely, as long as the `admins` field has been initialized:

```rust
#[contracttype]
struct AdminInfo {
    admins: Vec<Address>,
    is_frozen: bool,
}
```

This struct is compatible with the previous struct and is sufficient to keep the contract operational (notice, that `Option` is not really necessary for `admins` anymore, although it may be kept as well for the sake of flexibility).

### Extending the interface of a contract function

Consider a protocol where multiple contracts consult the same policy contract to perform some checks. The policy contract has the following function for checking the policy:

```rust
fn check_policy(state: ProtocolState) -> bool {
    // some checks
}

#[contracttype]
struct ProtocolState {
    total_debt: i128,
    total_collateral: i128,
}
```

There are several different contracts that call `check_policy`.

Now let's say the protocol state definition has been expanded to include the `total_liquidation` field, and the policy contract needs to be updated to support it. There are several ways to go about this, for example, the `ProtocolState` struct can be updated to include the new field as non-optional:

```rust
#[contracttype]
struct ProtocolState {
    total_debt: i128,
    total_collateral: i128,
    total_liquidation: i128,
}
```

Every caller of `check_policy` can be updated to provide the new field and still remain compatible with the old version of the policy contract. After every caller has been updated, the policy contract itself can be updated as well.

Alternatively, the new field can be added as an `Option` type, which allows the policy contract to be updated first, and then the callers can be updated one by one:

```rust
#[contracttype]
struct ProtocolState {
    total_debt: i128,
    total_collateral: i128,
    total_liquidation: Option<i128>,
}
```

After every contract has been updated, the policy contract can be updated again to enforce that the `total_liquidation` field is always present (by unwrapping the `Option`, or removing it from the type definition altogether).
