## Preamble

```
CAP: 0032
Title: Trustline Preauthorization
Author: Jonathan Jove
Status: Draft
Created: 2020-04-28
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/issues/303
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
This proposal makes it possible to authorize a trust line before it is created.

## Motivation
This proposal seeks to solve the following problem: an issuer should be able to
authorize a trust line without waiting for the trust line to be created.

Consider, for example, an issuer that wants to issue `AUTH_REQUIRED` assets to
an account that does not have a trust line for the asset. With the current
version of the protocol, the issuer will need to wait until the account has
created a trust line before authorizing the trust line. This presents friction
to the issuer, which must now employ additional machinery to either monitor the
ledger or use pre-signed/pre-authorized transactions. In either case, complexity
is increased for an operation fundamental to the network.

### Goals Alignment
This proposal is aligned with several Stellar Network Goals, among them:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
  create highly usable products.
- The Stellar Network should enable cross-border payments, i.e. payments via
  exchange of assets, throughout the globe, enabling users to make payments
  between assets in a manner that is fast, cheap, and highly usable.
    - In support of this, the Stellar Network should enable asset issuance, but
      as a means of enabling cross-border payments.

## Abstract
We introduce `PreauthorizationEntry` as a new type of `LedgerEntry` which
represents authorization to hold an asset, potentially before the corresponding
trust line has been created. The operation `CreatePreauthorizationOp` makes it
possible to create a `PreauthorizationEntry` whereas the operation
`RemovePreauthorizationOp` makes it possible to remove a `PreauthorizationEntry`.
When creating a trust line with `ChangeTrustOp`, the `flags` will now be set
from a corresponding `PreauthorizationEntry` if it exists. `AllowTrustOp` will
also be updated to modify just a trust line, just a `PreauthorizationEntry`, or
both depending on which exist.

## Specification

### XDR

#### Refactor AllowTrustOp
```c++
union NonNativeAssetCode switch (AssetType type)
{
// ASSET_TYPE_NATIVE is not allowed
case ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM4:
    AssetCode4 assetCode4;
case ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12:
    AssetCode12 assetCode12;
};

struct AllowTrustOp
{
    AccountID trustor;

    NonNativeAssetCode asset;

    // 0, or any bitwise combination of TrustLineFlags
    uint32 authorize;
};
```

#### PreauthorizationEntry
```c++
enum LedgerEntryType
{
    // ... ACCOUNT, TRUSTLINE, OFFER, unchanged ...
    DATA = 3,
    PREAUTHORIZATION = 4
};

struct PreauthorizationEntry
{
    // Account for which the preauthorization applies
    AccountID accountID;

    // Asset for which the preauthorization applies
    Asset asset;

    // See TrustLineFlags
    uint32 flags;

    // Amount of native asset to pay the reserve
    int64 reserve

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};

struct LedgerEntry
{
    uint32 lastModifiedLedgerSeq; // ledger the LedgerEntry was last changed

    union switch (LedgerEntryType type)
    {
    // ... ACCOUNT, TRUSTLINE, OFFER, DATA unchanged ...
    case PREAUTHORIZATION:
        PreauthorizationEntry preauthorization;
    }
    data;

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};
```

#### Operations
```c++
enum OperationType
{
    // ... CREATE_ACCOUNT, ..., MANAGE_BUY_OFFER unchanged ...
    PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND = 13,
    CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION = 14,
    REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION = 15
};

struct CreatePreauthorizationOp
{
    // Account to preauthorize
    AccountID accountID;

    // Preauthorization asset
    NonNativeAssetCode asset;
};

struct RemovePreauthorizationOp
{
    // Account from which to remove preauthorization
    AccountID accountID;

    // Preauthorization asset
    NonNativeAssetCode asset;
};

struct Operation
{
    // sourceAccount is the account used to run the operation
    // if not set, the runtime defaults to "sourceAccount" specified at
    // the transaction level
    AccountID* sourceAccount;

    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    // ... CREATE_ACOUNT, ..., PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND unchanged ...
    case CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION:
        CreatePreauthorizationOp createPreauthorizationOp;
    case REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION:
        RemovePreauthorizationOp removePreauthorizationOp;
    }
    body;
};
```

#### Operation Results
```c++
enum CreatePreauthorizationResultCode
{
    CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS = 0,
    CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_MALFORMED = -1,
    CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_ALREADY_EXISTS = -2,
    CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_LOW_RESERVE = -3
};

union CreatePreauthorizationResult switch (CreatePreauthorizationResultCode code)
{
case CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS:
    void;
default:
    void;
};

enum RemovePreauthorizationResultCode
{
    REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS = 0,
    REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_DOES_NOT_EXIST = -1,
    REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_LINE_FULL = -2
};

union RemovePreauthorizationResult switch (RemovePreauthorizationResultCode code)
{
case REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS:
    void;
default:
    void;
};

struct OperationResult
{
    // sourceAccount is the account used to run the operation
    // if not set, the runtime defaults to "sourceAccount" specified at
    // the transaction level
    AccountID* sourceAccount;

    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    // ... CREATE_ACOUNT, ..., REMOVE_SPONSORSHIP unchanged ...
    case CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION:
        CreatePreauthorizationResult createPreauthorizationResult;
    case REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATIOn:
        RemovePreauthorizationResult removePreauthorizationResult;
    }
    body;
};
```

### Semantics

#### CreatePreauthorizationOp
A `PreauthorizationEntry` can only be created by the `CreatePreauthorizationOp`
operation. `CreatePreauthorizationOp` is invalid with
`CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_MALFORMED` if `asset` is invalid.

The behavior of `CreatePreauthorizationOp` is as follows:

1. Fail with `CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_ALREADY_EXISTS` if a
   `PreauthorizationEntry` with the specified `accountID` and `asset` already
   exists
2. Fail with `CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_LOW_RESERVE` if the `sourceAccount` does
   not have at least `baseReserve` available balance of native asset
3. Deduct `baseReserve` of native asset from `sourceAccount`
4. Create a `PreauthorizationEntry` as `preauthorization` with the following
   properties:
    - `preauthorization.accountID = accountID`
    - `preauthorization.asset = asset`
    - `preauthorization.flags = 0` if `sourceAccount.flags & AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG`
      and `preauthorization.flags = AUTHORIZED_FLAG` otherwise
5. If a trust line `tl` with the specified `accountID` and `asset` exists, then
   set `preauthorization.flags = tl.flags`
6. Succeed with `CREATE_PREAUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`

`CreatePreauthorizationOp` requires low threshold because it cannot be used to
send funds.

#### RemovePreauthorizationOp
A `PreauthorizationEntry` can only be removed by the `RemovePreauthorizationOp`
operation. `RemovePreauthorizationOp` is invalid with
`REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_MALFORMED` if `asset` is invalid.

The behavior of `RemovePreauthorizationOp` is as follows:

1. Fail with `REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_DOES_NOT_EXIST` if there does not exist a
   `PreauthorizationEntry` with the specified `accountID` and `asset`
2. Fail with `REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_LINE_FULL` if the `sourceAccount` does not
   have at least `reserve` available limit of native asset
3. Add `reserve` of native asset to `sourceAccount`
4. Remove the specified `PreauthorizationEntry`
5. Succeed with `REMOVE_PREAUTHORIZATION_SUCCESS`

`RemovePreauthorizationOp` requires low threshold because it cannot be used to
send funds.

#### ChangeTrustOp
The behavior of `ChangeTrustOp` is unchanged except when creating a trust line.
In this case, we add one additional step immediately before success:

1. ...
2. If a preauthorization entry `preauthorization` with the `sourceAccount` and
   specified `asset` exists, then set `flags = preauthorization.flags`
3. Succeed with `CHANGE_TRUST_SUCCESS`

#### AllowTrustOp
The behavior of `AllowTrustOp` must be modified to maintain the invariant that
a trust line and a preauthorization entry for the same `accountID` and `asset`
must have the same `flags`.

First, we now fail with `ALLOW_TRUST_NO_TRUST_LINE` only if both the trust line
and preauthorization entry do not exist:

1. ...
2. Load the trust line and preauthorization entry with the `sourceAccount` and
   specified `assetID`
3. Fail with `ALLOW_TRUST_NO_TRUST_LINE` if neither exists
4. ...

Second, immediately before success we must set the `flags` on the trust line and
the preauthorization entry if they exist:

1. ...
2. If the trust line exists with the `sourceAccount` and specified `asset`
   exists, set the trust line `flags` as specified
3. If the preauthorization entry with the `sourceAccount` and specified `asset`
   exists, set the preauthorization entry `flags` as specified
4. Suceed with `ALLOW_TRUST_SUCCESS`

## Design Rationale

### PreauthorizationEntry is not a sub-entry
Each `PreauthorizationEntry` exists as an independent entity on the ledger. It
is clear that a `PreauthorizationEntry` cannot be a sub-entry of `accountID`,
because it is a security risk for accounts to be able to add
sub-entries to other accounts. But why should these entries be independent
entities on the ledger rather than sub-entries of the accounts that created
them? The main benefit of this design is that issuers are not limited in the
number of preauthorization entries they can create.

### TrustLines and Preauthorizations Can Exist Simultaneously
This proposal makes it possible for a trust line and a preauthorization entry
with the same `accountID` and `asset` to exist simultaneously. We avoid any
ambiguity in the authorization state by guaranteeing that if both do exist
simultaneously, then they must have the same `flags`. It is possible to maintain
this property because there is at most one trust line and one preauthorization
entry for a given `accountID` and `asset`.

## Backwards Incompatibilities
All downstream systems will need updated XDR in order to recognize the new
operations and ledger entries.

## Security Concerns
This proposal will slightly reduce the efficacy of base reserve changes, because
a `PreauthorizationEntry` that has insufficient reserve is still usable.

## Test Cases
None yet.

## Implementation
None yet.
