## Preamble

```
CAP: 0067
Title: Unified Asset Events
Working Group:
    Owner: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
    Authors: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Consulted: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>, Jake Urban <jake@stellar.org>, Simon Chow <simon.chow@stellar.org>
Status: Final
Created: 2025-01-13
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/discussions/1553
Protocol version: 23
```

## Simple Summary

Emit `transfer`, `mint`, `burn`, `clawback`, `fee`, and `set_authorized` events in Classic in the same format as what we see in Soroban so that the movement of assets and trustline updates can be tracked using a single stream of data. In addition to emitting events in Classic, update the events emitted in the Stellar Asset Contract to be semantically correct and compatible with SEP-41.

## Motivation

Tracking the movement of Stellar assets today is complex because you need to consume both Soroban events emitted by the Stellar Asset Contract and ledger entry changes for Classic operations. There are also differences between Stellar assets and custom Soroban tokens that this CAP will address so those differences will be made irrelevant to the end user.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

  - The Stellar Network should be secure and reliable, and should bias towards safety, simplicity,
  reliability, and performance over new functionality.

## Abstract

The changes specified by this CAP - 
* Remove the admin from the topics of the `mint` and `clawback` events emitted in the SAC.
* Update issuer semantics in the SAC so that a `transfer` involving the issuer will emit the semantically correct event (`mint` or `burn`).
* Add memo support to Soroban by adding a `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT` and allow the SAC to take in this type in the `transfer` function call.
* Update the `data` field in the `transfer` event from an integer to a map to store additional memo information.
* Emit an event for every movement of an `Asset` of types `ASSET_TYPE_NATIVE`, `ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM4`, and `ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12`. in Stellar classic. All of the added events will follow the format of the existing Stellar Asset Contract events, with the exception of a new `fee` event to track fees paid by the source account.

## Specification

### XDR Changes

This patch of XDR changes is based on the XDR files in commit `fa0338f4a25a95320d2143c8f08d200f0a360a4b` of stellar-xdr.
```diff mddiffcheck.ignore=true
diff --git a/Stellar-contract.x b/Stellar-contract.x
index 5113005..71738cb 100644
--- a/Stellar-contract.x
+++ b/Stellar-contract.x
@@ -179,7 +179,16 @@ case CONTRACT_EXECUTABLE_STELLAR_ASSET:
 enum SCAddressType
 {
     SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT = 0,
-    SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT = 1
+    SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT = 1,
+    SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT = 2,
+    SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE = 3,
+    SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL = 4
+};
+
+struct MuxedEd25519Account
+{
+    uint64 id;
+    uint256 ed25519;
 };
 
 union SCAddress switch (SCAddressType type)
@@ -188,6 +197,12 @@ case SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT:
     AccountID accountId;
 case SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT:
     Hash contractId;
+case SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT:
+    MuxedEd25519Account muxedAccount;
+case SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
+    ClaimableBalanceID claimableBalanceId;
+case SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL:
+    PoolID liquidityPoolId;
 };
 
 %struct SCVal;
diff --git a/Stellar-ledger.x b/Stellar-ledger.x
index 0fc03e2..963acc4 100644
--- a/Stellar-ledger.x
+++ b/Stellar-ledger.x
@@ -434,6 +434,41 @@ struct TransactionMetaV3
                                          // Soroban transactions).
 };
 
+struct OperationMetaV2
+{
+    ExtensionPoint ext;
+
+    LedgerEntryChanges changes;
+
+    ContractEvent events<>;
+};
+
+struct SorobanTransactionMetaV2
+{
+    SorobanTransactionMetaExt ext;
+
+    SCVal* returnValue;
+};
+
+// Transaction-level events happen at different stages of the ledger apply flow
+// (as opposed to the operation events that all happen atomically when 
+// transaction is applied).
+// This enum represents the possible stages during which an event has been
+// emitted.
+enum TransactionEventStage {
+    // The event has happened before any one of the transactions has its 
+    // operations applied.
+    TRANSACTION_EVENT_STAGE_BEFORE_ALL_TXS = 0,
+    // The event has happened immediately after operations of the transaction
+    // have been applied.
+    TRANSACTION_EVENT_STAGE_AFTER_TX = 1,
+    // The event has happened after every transaction had its operations 
+    // applied.
+    TRANSACTION_EVENT_STAGE_AFTER_ALL_TXS = 2
+}
+
+// Represents a transaction-level event in metadata.
+// Currently this is limited to the fee events (when fee is charged or 
+// refunded).
+struct TransactionEvent {    
+    TransactionEventStage stage;  // Stage at which an event has occurred.
+    ContractEvent event;  // The contract event that has occurred.
+}
+
+struct TransactionMetaV4
+{
+    ExtensionPoint ext;
+
+    LedgerEntryChanges txChangesBefore;  // tx level changes before operations
+                                         // are applied if any
+    OperationMetaV2 operations<>;        // meta for each operation
+    LedgerEntryChanges txChangesAfter;   // tx level changes after operations are
+                                         // applied if any
+    SorobanTransactionMetaV2* sorobanMeta; // Soroban-specific meta (only for
+                                           // Soroban transactions).
+
+    TransactionEvent events<>; // Used for transaction-level events (like fee payment)
+    DiagnosticEvent diagnosticEvents<>; // Used for all diagnostic information
+};
+
+
 // This is in Stellar-ledger.x to due to a circular dependency 
 struct InvokeHostFunctionSuccessPreImage
 {
@@ -453,6 +541,8 @@ case 2:
     TransactionMetaV2 v2;
 case 3:
     TransactionMetaV3 v3;
+case 4:
+    TransactionMetaV4 v4;
 };
 
 // This struct groups together changes on a per transaction basis
```

### New host functions

The diff is based on commit `9a24835ec6d75c526fb128a1d73b92e7d7becfa7` of `rs-soroban-env`.

```diff mddiffcheck.ignore=true
diff --git a/soroban-env-common/env.json b/soroban-env-common/env.json
index d421dca2..4249efc6 100644
--- a/soroban-env-common/env.json
+++ b/soroban-env-common/env.json
@@ -2403,6 +2403,32 @@
                     ],
                     "return": "Void",
                     "docs": "Authorizes sub-contract calls for the next contract call on behalf of the current contract. Every entry in the argument vector corresponds to `InvokerContractAuthEntry` contract type that authorizes a tree of `require_auth` calls on behalf of the current contract. The entries must not contain any authorizations for the direct contract call, i.e. if current contract needs to call contract function F1 that calls function F2 both of which require auth, only F2 should be present in `auth_entries`."
+                },
+                {
+                    "export": "4",
+                    "name": "get_address_from_muxed_address",
+                    "args": [
+                        {
+                            "name": "muxed_address",
+                            "type": "MuxedAddressObject"
+                        }
+                    ],
+                    "return": "AddressObject",
+                    "docs": "Returns the address corresponding to the provided MuxedAddressObject as a new AddressObject. Note, that MuxedAddressObject consists of the address and multiplexing id, so this conversion just strips the multiplexing id from the input muxed address.",
+                    "min_supported_protocol": 23
+                },
+                {
+                    "export": "5",
+                    "name": "get_id_from_muxed_address",
+                    "args": [
+                        {
+                            "name": "muxed_address",
+                            "type": "MuxedAddressObject"
+                        }
+                    ],
+                    "return": "U64Val",
+                    "docs": "Returns the multiplexing id corresponding to the provided MuxedAddressObject as a U64Val.",
+                    "min_supported_protocol": 23
                 }
             ]
         },
```

## Semantics

### Remove the admin from the SAC `mint`, `clawback`, and `set_authorized` events

The `mint` event will look like:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

The `clawback` event will look like:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["clawback", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

The `set_authorized` event will look like:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["set_authorized", id:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: authorize:bool
```

### Emit the semantically correct event for a Stellar Asset Contract `transfer` when the issuer is involved 

At the moment, if the issuer is the sender in a Stellar Asset Contract `transfer`, the asset will be minted. If the issuer is the recipient, the asset will be burned. The event emitted in both scenarios, however, is the `transfer` event. This CAP changes that behavior to instead emit the `mint`/`burn` event.

### Multiplexing support

Multiplexing (muxing) is a technique used by the Stellar users to represent custodial accounts, i.e. accounts that are represented by a single on-chain entity, but may have an arbitrary number of off-chain, 'virtual' balances. Stellar protocol currently provides two ways for supporting the account 'multiplexing' ('muxing'): using the transaction memo to identify the payment destination, and the `MuxedAccount` type that can identify the source or destination of most of the Stellar operations.

This CAP ensures that muxing information is represented in the events, and also extends the multiplexing functionality to Soroban operations.

#### `MuxedAddressObject` host object

A new host object type called `MuxedAddressObject` is added to represent multiplexed addresses (only account addresses as of this CAP). While the regular host objects used to have 1:1 mapping to `SCVal`, due to changes in this CAP it's necessary to change the semantics and have 1:n mapping between `SCVal::SCV_ADDRESS` (and the respective `ScAddress`) and the host objects. Specifically, semantics of the mapping between `ScAddress` and host objects are updated in the following fashion:

- (unchanged) `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` and `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT` still correspond to `AddressObject`
- `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT` corresponds to `MuxedAddressObject`
- `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE` and `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL` are disallowed by host and any conversion from XDR to host objects that involves these address kinds will fail (including passing these in the authorization payloads, function arguments, decoding the XDR blobs via host function etc.).

Other than the special XDR mapping, `MuxedAddressObject` is a regular host object and thus it's not implicitly compatible with `AddressObject` type. Thus the contracts that expect the regular `AddressObject` as an input argument will fail if `ScAddress::SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT` is passed to them (the failure is expected and is the same kind of failure as for passing any other object kind beyond `AddressObject`).

`MuxedAddressObject` is meant to identify the multiplexed addresses for the special cases that require them. Thus we only provide the host functions that get the two parts of `MuxedAddressObject`:

- `get_address_from_muxed_address` returns the regular address part as `AddressObject`
- `get_id_from_muxed_address` returns the multiplexing identifier as `U64Val`

##### `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT` is prohibited in storage keys

Multiplexed accounts are 'virtual' accounts that are meant to only exist off-chain. While with this CAP it will be possible for any contract to process `MuxedAddressObject` in an arbitrary fashion, most of the time it would be a mistake to use the whole muxed address in a contract data storage key (as it's purpose by definition is to support off-chain multiplexing). Thus as an additional precaution Soroban host will produce an error in case if `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT` is present in the contract data key `SCVal`(either directly, or anywhere in the nested containers). This restriction is applied for all the kinds of the contract data storage, including the instance storage.

In case if the users do want to use `MuxedAddressObject` for multiplexing on-chain, they can still use the provided host functions to decompose the address into two values and store them in a user-defined data structure.

#### Update the SAC `transfer` function to support muxed addresses

The `transfer` function of the Stellar Asset contract will be updated to accept `AddressObject` or `MuxedAddressObject` both for the `to` argument of the `transfer` function. If a `MuxedAddressObject` is passed, then the `transfer` function will behave as if a respective `AddressObject` has been passed. The only semantics difference compared to using a regular `AddressObject` is the event payload to follow the format described in the following section.

#### Emit a map as the `data` field in the `transfer` and `mint` event if muxed information is being emitted for the destination.

The `data` field is currently an integer that represents the `amount`. If no muxed information is being emitted, this will not change. If we're emitting muxed information, then the `data` field on the `transfer` and `mint` event will be an `SCVal` of type `SCV_MAP`. In
that case, the key for each map entry will be an `SCSymbol` with the name of the field in `data` (eg. "amount"), and the value will be represented by the types specified by the events below.

The general `transfer` event format that involves muxed accounts is `topics: ["transfer", from:<non-muxed ScAddress>, to:<non-muxed ScAddress>] data: { amount: i128, to_muxed_id:u64|bytes|string }`, where `to_muxed_id` is present. The `mint` event format that involves muxed accounts is `topics: ["mint", to:<non-muxed ScAddress>] data: { amount: i128, to_muxed_id:u64|bytes|string }`. The muxed account is always represented as a pair of (`non-muxed ScAddress`, `muxed_id`) , i.e the pair of (`to`, `to_muxed_id`) identifies the muxed transfer destination. Non-muxed accounts are represented as a singular `from`/`to` value in the event topics and the `to_muxed_id` key won't be present in the `data` map.

The mapping between the input muxed addresses and the emitted events is generically defined as follows:

1. `MuxedAccount` (or `ScAddress` that wraps `MuxedAccount`, i.e `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_MUXED_ACCOUNT`) with `KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519` variant set will be represented as a pair of `ScVal::SCV_ADDRESS` with `ScAddress` type `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` and the same `ed25519` key as in the `MuxedAccount`, and `ScVal::SCV_U64` `muxed_id` with the same value as the `id` field of the `MuxedAccount`.
2. If transaction memo is not `MEMO_NONE`, and the classic operation in the transaction has a destination that is a non-muxed classic account (i.e. is representable by `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` address), then the transfer event destination will be represented as a pair of `ScVal::SCV_ADDRESS` with `to` `ScAddress` type `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` and the same `ed25519` key as in the destination account, and an `to_muxed_id` `ScVal` containing the transaction memo. The memo is mapped to `ScVal` in the following fashion:
  - `MEMO_ID` is represented by `SCV_U64`
  - `MEMO_TEXT` is represented by `SCV_STRING`
  - `MEMO_HASH` and `MEMO_RETURN` are represented as `SCV_BYTES`, i.e. these memo types are indistinguishable in the event

Note, that the memo mapping rules above imply that in case if the destination of the transfer or mint is not a classic account (i.e. a claimable balance, or liquidity pool), or a muxed account itself, then the transaction memo will not be represented in the unified events at all.

Here is how the rules above generally apply to the generated unified events (the event-specific sections also contain more detailed information where necessary):

- For `transfer` and `mint` events coming directly from Soroban (i.e. from Stellar Asset contract) we will represent the input `KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519` muxed account addresses according to the rule 1
- For the `transfer` and `mint` events emitted due to non-Soroban value movement we make best-effort mapping based on the input `MuxedAccount`s and the transaction memo:
  - If the destination is a `MuxedAccount` with `KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519`, then `to_muxed_id` will be emitted according to rule 1
  - If the destination is a non-muxed classic account (i.e. `MuxedAccount` with `KEY_TYPE_ED25519` variant set), then emit `to_muxed_id` according to rule 2

### New Events for Representing Fees

When a transaction has a fee charged or refunded, emit an event in the following format in the transaction-level `events` field of the `TransactionMetaV4`:
```
contract: native asset, topics: ["fee", from:Address], data: amount:i128
```

Where `from` is the account paying the fee or receiving the fee refund, either the fee bump fee account for fee bump transactions, or the transaction source account otherwise. `amount` represents the fee charged (when positive) or refunded (when negative). 

Transaction-level events also have `TransactionEventStage` defined in order to identify when an event has occurred within the ledger application flow. The fee events are emitted with the following stages:

- Initial fee charged is always emitted with `TRANSACTION_EVENT_STAGE_BEFORE_ALL_TXS` stage, i.e. fee is charged before any transactions applied
- Fee refund events are only emitted when the refund is non-zero (as of protocol 23 that may only be true for Soroban transactions) and the stage depends on the protocol:
  - Before protocol 23 the stage is `TRANSACTION_EVENT_STAGE_AFTER_TX`, i.e. the fee is refunded immediately after the transaction has been applied
  - Starting from protocol 23 the stage is `TRANSACTION_EVENT_STAGE_AFTER_ALL_TXS`, i.e. the fee is refunded after every transaction has been applied

No more transaction level events may be emitted as of protocol 23. The future protocols may introduce more fee events that will follow the same pattern of identifying the stage when the event has occurred.

The final fee paid can be calculated by taking the sum of the amounts from all `fee` events.

### New Events for Operations
This section will go over the semantics of how the additional `transfer`/`mint`/`burn`/`clawback`, `set_authorized` events are emitted for each operation. These events will be emitted through the `events<>` field in the new `OperationMetaV2`. Soroban events will be moved to `OperationMetaV2`. The hash of the current soroban events will still exist under `INVOKE_HOST_FUNCTION_SUCCESS` as it does today. It's also important to note that nothing is being removed from meta, and in fact, the emission of the events (as well as the new meta version) mentioned in this section will be configurable through a flag.

Note that the `contract` field for these events corresponds to the Stellar Asset Contract address for the respective asset. The Stellar Asset Contract instance is not required to be deployed for the asset. The events will be published using the reserved contract address regardless of deployment status.

#### Payment
Emit one of the following events -

For a payment not involving the issuer, or if both the sender and receiver are the issuer:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

When sending from an issuer:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

When sending to an issuer:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["burn", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), `to_muxed_id` can be added to the `data` map.


#### Path Payment Strict Send / Path Payment Strict Receive
For each movement of the asset created by the path payment, emit one of the following -

```
contract: assetA, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
contract: assetB, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

If `from` is the issuer on a side of the trade, emit the following instead for that side of the trade:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

If `to` is the issuer on a side of the trade, emit the following instead for that side of the trade:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["burn", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the account or the liquidity pool (represented by the new `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL` address type) being debited (seller).
* `to` is the account or liquidity pool (represented by the new `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL` address type) being credited (buyer).

The trades within a path payment are conceptually between the source account and the owner of the offers. Those are the addresses that'll appear on the event pairs specified above. At the end of all the trades, we need to emit one more `transfer` (or `burn` if the destination is the issuer) event to indicate a transfer from the source account to the destination account. The amount will be equivalent to the sum of the destination asset received on the trades of the final hop.

Note that if the path payment has an empty path and `sendAsset == destAsset`, then the operation is effectively a regular [payment](#payment), so emit an event following the specifications of the payment section.

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), `to_muxed_id` can be added to the `data` map, but only for the final transfer to the destination.

#### Create Account
Emit the following event:
```
contract: native asset, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the account being debited (creator).
* `to` is the account being credited (created).
* `amount` is the starting native balance.

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), `to_muxed_id` can be added to the `data` map. The `destination` on a `CreateAccountOp` can't be muxed, so `to_muxed_id`, will only be added to the data map if the transaction memo is set.

#### Merge Account
Emit the following event:
```
contract: native asset, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the account being debited (merged).
* `to` is the account being credited (merged into).
* `amount` is the merged native balance.

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), `to_muxed_id` can be added to the `data` map. 

#### Create Claimable Balance
Emit the following event:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* from is the account being debited.
* to is the claimable balance being created. The type of this address will be `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE`.
* amount is the amount moved into the claimable balance.

If an asset is a movement from the issuer of the asset, instead emit for the movement:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), the `to` address will be a claimable balance id, so it does not make sense to add the transaction memo into the event. Therefore, `to_muxed_id` will not be emitted in this case.

#### Claim Claimable Balance
Emit the following event:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```
* `from` is the claimable balance. The type of this address will be `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE`.
* `to` is the account being credited
* `amount` is the amount in the claimable balance

If the claim is a movement to the issuer of the asset, instead emit for the movement:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["burn", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), `to_muxed_id` can be added to the `data` map on the `transfer` event. The `destination` on a claimable balance's `claimant` cannot be muxed, so `to_muxed_id` will only be added to the data map if the transaction memo is set.

#### Liquidity Pool Deposit
Emit the following events:
```
contract: assetA, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
contract: assetB, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the account being debited.
* `to` is the liquidity pool being credited. The type of this address will be `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL`.
* `amount` is the amount moved into the liquidity pool.

If an asset is a movement from the issuer of the asset, instead emit for the movement:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), the `to` address will be a liquidity pool id, so it does not make sense to add the transaction memo into the event. Therefore, `to_muxed_id` will not be emitted in this case.

#### Liquidity Pool Withdraw
Emit the following events:
```
contract: assetA, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
contract: assetB, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the liquidity pool. The type of this address will be `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL`.
* `to` is the account being credited.
* `amount` is the amount moved out of the liquidity pool.


If an asset is issued by the withdrawer, instead emit for the movement of the issued asset:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["burn", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

As specified in the [section to update the transfer and mint events data field](#emit-a-map-as-the-data-field-in-the-transfer-and-mint-event-if-muxed-information-is-being-emitted-for-the-destination), `to_muxed_id` can be added to the `data` map on the `transfer` event.

#### Manage Buy Offer / Manage Sell Offer / Create Passive Sell Offer
Emit two events per offer traded against. Each pair of events represents both sides of a trade. This does mean zero events can be emitted if the resulting offer is not marketable - 

```
contract: assetA, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
contract: assetB, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

If `from` is the issuer on a side of the trade, emit the following instead for that side of the trade:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

If `to` is the issuer on a side of the trade, emit the following instead for that side of the trade:
```
contract: asset, topics: ["burn", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the account being debited (seller).
* `to` is the account being credited (buyer).

`to_muxed_id` will not be set for events emitted by any of these offer operations.

#### Clawback / Clawback Claimable Balance
Emit the following event:

```
contract: asset, topics: ["clawback", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the account or claimable balance being debited.
* `amount` is the amount being moved out of the account and burned.


#### Allow Trust / Set Trustline Flags
If a trustline has the `AUTHORIZED_FLAG` added or removed, as a result of one of these operations, then a `set_authorized` event should be emitted.

```
contract: asset, topics: ["set_authorized", id:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: authorize:bool
```

* `id` is the account that the trustline belongs to.
* `authorize` is a bool that determines if the trustline is now authorized to send and receive payments for this asset.

If either operation is used to revoke authorization from a trustline that deposited into a liquidity pool then claimable balances can be created for the withdrawn assets (See [CAP-0038](cap-0038.md#SetTrustLineFlagsOp-and-AllowTrustOp) for more info). If any claimable balances are created due to this scenario, emit the following event for each claimable balance:

```
contract: asset, topics: ["transfer", from:Address, to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `from` is the liquidity pool. The type of this address will be `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL`.
* `to` is the claimable balance being created. The type of this address will be `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE`.
* `amount` is the amount moved into the claimable balance.

If the an asset in the liquidity pool is being withdrawn for the issuer, then no claimable balance will be created for that asset, so instead emit a burn event - 
```
contract: asset, topics: ["burn", from:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

Due to the fact that `to` is a claimable balance id, we will not emit `to_muxed_id` in the `transfer` event.

#### Inflation
Emit a `mint` event for each inflation winner:

```
contract: asset, topics: ["mint", to:Address, sep0011_asset:String], data: amount:i128
```

* `to` is one of the winning account addresses.
* `amount` is the amount of the native asset won.

`to_muxed_id` will not be set for events emitted by the Inflation operation.

### Retroactively emitting events
The events specified above not only need to be emitted going forward, but also on replay for all ledgers from genesis so balances can be built from events. Some Stellar Asset Contract events are also being updated (removing the admin from `mint`/`clawback`, and emitting `mint`/`burn` instead of `transfer` when the issuer if `from` or `to`). Due to the fact that Soroban events are hashed into the ledger, we will continue to emit Stellar Asset Contract events as they were emitted in previous protocols. This will, however, cause issues with rebuilding balances on replay, so there will be a configuration flag added that will result in [V20,V22] events being emitted in the V23 format for the scenarios just mentioned. This does mean that the events can't be used to verify the hash of the events in `InvokeHostFunctionResult`, but this flag will be disabled by default.

#### Pre-protocol 8 bug

Another relevant detail for replaying events is that prior to protocol 8, there was a bug that could result in the minting/burning of XLM. To allow for the ability to build balances with only events, we not only need to emit the events specified in this CAP from genesis, but also handle that bug properly.

For both the mint and burn scenario, the affected account will be the source account, and that should be the only account in an operation with a balance difference not entirely reflected by the events specified in this CAP. If we take the total diff of XLM in an `Operations` `OperationMeta` (similar to what the `ConservationOfLumens` invariant does) and emit that diff as a mint/burn event for the source account, then consumers should be able to track balances correctly. For every operation, if the source account is found to be affected, then exactly one event will be emitted - either an XLM mint or an XLM burn. To make sure the events are emitted in a way where the balances don't go negative and make sense, any XLM mint should be emitted first in `OperationMetaV2`, and burns should be emitted last.

## Design Rationale

### Remove the admin from the SAC `mint` and `clawback` events

The admin isn't relevant information when a mint or `clawback` occurs, and it hinders compatibility with SEP-41 for when these two events are added to it because the admin is an implementation detail. For a custom token, an admin doesn't need to be a single `Address`, or an admin may not required at all to emit either event.

### TransactionMetaV4

This CAP introduces a new `TransactionMeta` version, `TransactionMetaV4`. Now that we're emitting events for more than just Soroban, this allows us to clean up the structure of meta because `TransactionMetaV3` assumed events would only be emitted for Soroban. This change also allows us to emit events at the operation layer instead of the transaction layer using the new `OperationMetaV2` type. Transaction level events like `fee` will still be emitted at the transaction level under `TransactionMetaV4.events`.

It's important to note that transaction meta is not part of the protocol, so the emission of `TransactionMetaV4` instead of `TransactionMetaV3` can be done using a config flag, allowing consumers of meta to switch on their own time.

### Emit the semantically correct event instead of no longer allowing the issuer to transfer due to missing a trustline

The Stellar Asset Contract special cases the issuer logic because issuers can't hold a trustline for their own assets. This matches the logic in Classic. The special case was unnecessary however because the Stellar Asset Contract provides the `mint` and `burn` functions. This CAP could instead just remove the special case and allow `transfers` involving the issuer to fail due to a missing trustline,
but this would break any contracts that rely on this behavior (it's not known at this time if contracts like this exist, but we could check if there are any `transfers` on pubnet that involve the issuer). That's why this CAP chooses to instead emit the correct event in this scenario.

### Classic events will not be hashed into the ledger

For now, the new events being added for the non-soroban operations will not be hashed into the ledger to give us more flexibility while we figure out if we want to transform more of the meta ledger entry changes into events. We can start hashing the events at a later point. Soroban events will continued to be hashed as they are in protocol 22.

### New SCAddressType types

This CAP adds two new `SCAddressType` types - `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE` and `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_LIQUIDITY_POOL`. These types are used in the topic of an event where the address is not a contract or a stellar account.

### Order of precedence for `to_muxed_id` on the `transfer` and `mint` events

The `transfer` and `mint` event can emit muxed information for `to`, where the transaction memo will be forwarded to `to_muxed_id` for classic if the destination is not muxed, but the CAP has specified that if the destination is muxed and the transaction memo is set for classic events, then we set `to_muxed_id` using an order of precedence. We use the destinations muxed information over the transaction memo. The alternative was to also emit a transaction level `tx_memo` event, but we determined that this was not necessary as setting both a muxed destination account and a tx memo is an edge case without a relevant use case. If a consumer wants the tx memo as well, they can just look for it in the transaction.

### No diagnostics in OperationMetaV2

We currently clear all `OperationMeta` when a transaction fails, but with the way `OperationMetaV2` is setup in the CAP, we wouldn't be able to do that if there was a diagnostics vector inside `OperationMetaV2` is used. We would have to keep around each `OperationMetaV2` object, and clear the non diagnostic internals. Instead of making this change that downstream consumers may not expect, using the transaction level diagnostics vector for all diagnostics is sufficient. Classic operations won't emit any diagnostics in V23, and if we want them to in the future, we can just modify the diagnostic events to contain the operation id if that information is needed.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition
On the protocol upgrade, the SAC will start emitting the `mint` and `clawback` events without the `admin` topic. Also, the `transfer` event will not be emitted for `transfers` involving the issuer. Instead, the appropriate `mint`/`burn` will be emitted.

The unified events will not be part of the protocol, so they can be enabled with a configuration flag at anytime.

### Backwards Incompatibilities


### Resource Utilization
The additional events will use more resources if a node chooses to emit them.


## Security Concerns


## Future work


## Test Cases


## Implementation
