## Preamble

```
CAP: 0046-08 (formerly 0056)
Title: Smart Contract Events
Working Group:
    Owner: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
    Authors:
    Consulted:
Status: Draft
Created: 2022-06-29
Discussion: TBD
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
This CAP proposes an update to `TransactionMeta` along with new host functions
to allow for contracts to write data to the meta that can be consumed by
downstream systems.

## Motivation
Contract writers will need a way to emit information about what their specific
contracts are doing. Downstream consumers of these new messages can also push
these to subscribers, allowing users to listen to specific messages.

### Goals Alignment
This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:
* The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to create highly usable products

## Abstract
This CAP provides host functions for contracts to write messages that will be put
into `TransactionMeta`. It provides a way to cryptographically verify the
contents of `TransactionMeta`, and also moves `TransactionResult` into the meta
so they stop taking space in the archives.

## Specification

### Contract Events
This CAP makes a change to `TransactionMeta` and `TransactionResult` that will allow
a user to cryptographically verify anything in `TransactionMetaV3`.
`TransactionMetaV3` will store separate SHA256 hashes for ledger entry changes and
contract events, and the hash of those hashes will be stored in `TransactionResultPairV2`.

How can this be used? The `LedgerHeader` contains the hash of the
`TransactionResultSetV2`, so the user will first gather all results from the desired
ledger, hash them, and verify that the hash matches what's in the `LedgerHeader`.
With `TransactionResultSetV2` verified, the user can then find the `TransactionMetaV3`
for the transaction they're interested in, hash just contract events, combine
that hash with the other hashes in `TransactionMetaV3` and then verify it against
the hash stored in `TransactionResultPairV2`.

#### Host function
The `contract_event` host function specified in [CAP-0046-03](./CAP-0046-03.md#context-host-functions)
can be used to create events in contracts.

#### Stop storing TransactionResults in archives
This CAP also removes the `TransactionResult` from the archives by using
`TransactionHistoryResultEntryV2`. Instead, the `TransactionResult` will be
stored in `TransactionMetaV3`, while the hash of `TransactionResult` will be
stored in `TransactionMetaV3::hashes`. With this change, the archives will take less
space, but it does mean that the results will need to be be pulled from the
meta. Cryptographic verification would work just like contract events described
above, except you would match against the `TransactionResult` hash stored in
`TransactionMetaV3::hashes`.

`LedgerHeader::txSetResultHash` will also be updated to store the hash of
`TransactionResultSetV2`.

TODO: Does this work with InnerTransactionResultPair?

### TransactionMeta Normalization
TODO

### XDR Changes

See the XDR diffs in the Soroban overview CAP, specifically those covering
changes to transaction meta and results, result sets, history entries, and
contract events.

## Design Rationale

### TransactionResult in TransactionMeta
By removing the `TransactionResult` from the archives, the archives will take
less space going forward. The results will still be available in thr meta, so
there is no functionality lost here.

### TransactionMeta hashes
This CAP allows for the cryptographic verification of `TransactionMetaV3` by
including the SHA256 hash of the `hashes` field in `TransactionResultPairV2`.
This allows the user to verify the authenticity of any of the subcomponents of
`TransactionMetaV3`. The components are hashed separately so the user only needs
to hash the components they care about, and assume the other component hashes
are authentic. If any of the component hashes are incorrect, the verification
will fail. 

### Different event types
Each event host function uses a different type. This gives downstream users
another fields to query off of. In addition to that, events from `system_event`
are also special in that they can only be used by the host functions, allowing
users to see "system" level events as opposed to ones generated by contracts.
For example, this can be used when contracts are created to emit the hash of the
created contract.

### Topics
In addition to the `SCVal data` in `ContractEvent`, we also provide an `SCVec`
that the user can fill out with smallers values so downstream systems can
provide more narrow filtering and subscription options without prior knowledge
of the `data` format.

TODO: Specify how topics will be limited in size.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities
Any downstream system consume `TransactionResult` will need to pull this information from the `TransactionMeta` instead.

### Resource Utilization
TBD

## Security Concerns
The security concerns from [CAP-0051]
(https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0051.md#security-concerns)
apply here as well.

## Test Cases
TBD

## Implementation
TBD. See [rs-stellar-contract-env](https://github.com/stellar/rs-stellar-contract-env) and stellar-core’s repo (branch to be added) for the prototype implementation.
