## Preamble

```
CAP: 0029
Title: AllowTrust when not AUTH_REQUIRED
Working Group:
    Owner: Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
    Authors: Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>, Jon Jove <@jonjove>, Eric Saunders <@ire-and-curses>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
Status: Accepted
Created: 2019-12-13
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/d/msg/stellar-dev/igkJhpPUm-g/7k_3v6SKBQAJ
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
This CAP addresses the following authorization semantics requirements:
- An issuer should always be able to authorize a trustline regardless of any issuer flags.  
- An issuer should always be able to revoke a trustline for an asset that is set as revocable.

## Working Group

This protocol change was authored by Tomer Weller, with input from the consulted individuals
mentioned at the top of this document.

## Motivation
Trustline authorization is an important feature of the Stellar protocol. It allows issuers to handle various regulatory requirements. However, it's current behavior is not sensible with regards to configuration changes and revocable assets:
- The authorize (`ALLOW_TRUST, Authorize=AUTHORIZED_FLAG`) operation fails if the issuer does not have any flags set, even when the trustline is unauthorized. This complicates asset configuration changes.
- The revoke (`ALLOW_TRUST, Authorize=0` or `ALLOW_TRUST, Authorize=AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG` when `AUTHORIZED_FLAG` is set) operation fails if the issuer does not have the `AUTH_REQUIRED` flag set. This defeats the purpose of having revocable assets that default to authorized trustlines ("Blacklist authorization"). 

### Goals Alignment
This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to create highly usable products

## Specification
This CAP introduces two changes to `ALLOW_TRUST` semantics: 
- Allow `ALLOW_TRUST` operations that upgrade authorization (`Authorize=AUTHORIZED_FLAG` or `Authorize=AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG` when the trustline is unauthorized) to be performed regardless of any issuer account flags.   
- Allow `ALLOW_TRUST` revoke (`ALLOW_TRUST, Authorize=0` or `ALLOW_TRUST, Authorize=AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG` when `AUTHORIZED_FLAG` is set) operations to be performed on trustlines to assets that have the `AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag set, **regardless of whether or not their `AUTH_REQUIRED` flag is set**.

## Backwards Incompatibilities
This change is backward compatible for sensible consumers. It is not backward compatible for consumers that rely on the above operations failing and returning the `ALLOW_TRUST_TRUST_NOT_REQUIRED` result code.

## Design Rationale

[CAP-0035](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0035.md) introduces the `SET_TRUST_LINE_FLAGS` operation, which provides a better way to interface with the trustline flags. This operation will allow the authorization transitions specified in this CAP that currently return `ALLOW_TRUST_TRUST_NOT_REQUIRED`. While we could just leave `ALLOW_TRUST` the way it is and use `SET_TRUST_LINE_FLAGS` to get the desired behavior, making sure the possible authorization transitions are the same between operations would make it easier for the ecosystem to continue using `ALLOW_TRUST`. They can choose which operation to use, instead of being forced to switch. Keeping the logic the same will also make it easier for everyone to reason about the possible authorization transitions.


## Security Concerns

There are no security concerns here. This CAP just allows the issuer to perform more sensible authorization transitions for trustlines.

## Test Cases
//TBD

## Implementation
//TBD
