## Preamble

```
CAP: 0040
Title: Signed-Payload: Ed25519 Signed Payload Signer for Atomic Transaction Signature Disclosure
Working Group:
    Owner: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Authors: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Consulted: Jon Jove <@jonjove>, David Mazières <@stanford-scs>
Status: Final
Created: 2021-07-14
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/g/stellar-dev/c/Wp7gNaJvt40
Protocol version: 19
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal adds a new signer type that simplifies the signing process that
multiple parties must use in some contracts, such as payment channels, by
allowing all parties to share a set of transactions for signing and
guaranteeing that if one transaction is signed, authorized, and submitted that
information is revealed that allows all other transactions in the set to be
authorized.

## Working Group

This protocol change was authored by Leigh McCulloch, with input from the
consulted individuals mentioned at the top of this document.

## Motivation

[CAP-21] adds transaction precondition primitives that make it possible for
multi-party contracts, such as payment channels, to be implemented where a
relative time delay must occur between two transactions that have been mutually
agreed by all parties to the contract.

Signing a set of transactions in contracts that have a time delay as specified
in [CAP-21] requires participants to exchange signatures for each transaction
across multiple-steps, exchanging the signatures for the transactions in reverse
order that they can be executed.

A party must not share their signature for an earlier transaction before
receiving all signatures for latter transactions otherwise another party may be
able to submit that earlier transaction and lock the contract by refusing to
authorize a latter transaction.

In the payment channel designs identified in the design rationale of [CAP-21]
this requires participants to exchange signatures across at least three
messages. This coordination increases implementation complexity. This complexity
increases significantly for payment channel implementations that are
asynchronous or payment channels where receiving participants are allowed to
fall behind confirming payments from a sending participant.

Making it safe for parties of a contract to exchange all signatures for a set
of transactions in a single message without risk that only a subset of the
transactions could be authorized simplifies payment channel implementations.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
create highly usable products

## Specification

### XDR Changes

This patch of XDR changes is based on the XDR files in tag `v17.2.0` of
[stellar-core].

```diff mddiffcheck.base=v17.3.0
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x
index 8f7d5c20..03149f3d 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x
@@ -19,6 +19,7 @@ enum CryptoKeyType
     KEY_TYPE_ED25519 = 0,
     KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX = 1,
     KEY_TYPE_HASH_X = 2,
+    KEY_TYPE_ED25519_SIGNED_PAYLOAD = 3,
     // MUXED enum values for supported type are derived from the enum values
     // above by ORing them with 0x100
     KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519 = 0x100
@@ -33,7 +34,8 @@ enum SignerKeyType
 {
     SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_ED25519 = KEY_TYPE_ED25519,
     SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX = KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX,
-    SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X = KEY_TYPE_HASH_X
+    SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X = KEY_TYPE_HASH_X,
+    SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_ED25519_SIGNED_PAYLOAD = KEY_TYPE_ED25519_SIGNED_PAYLOAD
 };
 
 union PublicKey switch (PublicKeyType type)
@@ -52,6 +54,13 @@ case SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX:
 case SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X:
     /* Hash of random 256 bit preimage X */
     uint256 hashX;
+case SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_ED25519_SIGNED_PAYLOAD:
+    struct {
+        /* Public key that must sign the payload. */
+        uint256 ed25519;
+        /* Payload to be raw signed by ed25519. */
+        opaque payload<64>;
+    } ed25519SignedPayload;
 };
 
 // variable size as the size depends on the signature scheme used

```

### Semantics

This proposal introduces one new type of signer, the ed25519 signed payload
signer, that is defined as a variable length opaque payload with a maximum size
of 64 bytes and an ed25519 public key. A signature for the signer is the result
of signing the payload with the private key that the public key is derived.

The ed25519 signed payload signer is usable everywhere existing signers may be
used, including in the `extraSigners` transaction precondition added in
[CAP-21].

#### Signature

The signature of an ed25519 signed payload signer is the raw ed25519 signature
of the signer's payload using the private key that derives the signer's ed25519
public key.

For example, given:
- A private key `Ks` and its derived public key `Kp`.
- A ed25519 signed payload signer `S` that contains:
  - Payload `P`.
  - Public key `Kp`.

A signature that satisfies signer `S` is produced by:
- Ed25519 signing `P` with `Ks`.

Unlike transaction signatures in the Stellar protocol, the payload of this
signer is not combined with the network ID or hashed before passing it to the
ed25519 signing algorithm.

#### Signature Hint

The signature hint of an ed25519 signed payload signer is the last 4 bytes of
the ed25519 public key XORed with last 4 bytes of the payload. If the payload
has a length less than 4 bytes, then 1 to 4 zero bytes are appended to the
payload such that it has a length of 4 bytes, for calculating the hint.

#### Transaction Envelopes

This proposal makes no structural changes to transaction envelopes other than
the signature of an ed25519 signed payload signer may be included in the list of
decorated signatures.

#### Signature Checking

Signature checking is changed to include verifying that any ed25519 signed
payload signer's have matching signatures.

Ed25519 signed payload signer signatures are verified by performing ed25519
signature verification using the signature, the payload from the signer, and the
ed25519 public key from the signer.

#### Signer Verification Order

The current protocol validates signers in this order :
`SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX` -> `SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X` ->
`SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_ED25519`. This CAP will verify
`SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_ED25519_SIGNED_PAYLOAD` last after `SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_ED25519`.
The order can matter in the context of `txBAD_AUTH_EXTRA`, because we stop
checking signatures once we have matched enough signatures to meet the required
weight. If there are any signatures that have not been used, the transaction
fails with `txBAD_AUTH_EXTRA`.

#### Transaction Validity

If a payload signer is used in the `extraSigners` precondition specified in
[CAP-21], and the payload is empty, the transaction will fail with `txMALFORMED`
(also specified in [CAP-21]).

#### SetOptionsOp

`SetOptionsOp` will fail validation with `SET_OPTIONS_BAD_SIGNER` if the new
signed payload signer is used prior to the protocol upgrade, or if the payload
is empty.

## Design Rationale

This proposal provides a primitive that makes it possible to construct a set
of transactions where all transactions can be authorized and submitted if the
first transaction is authorized and submitted.

This proposal makes this possible since a Stellar transaction hash can be
specified as the payload of an ed25519 signed payload signer. A Stellar
transaction hash is the SHA-256 hash of the `TransactionSignaturePayload`
containing the Stellar transaction. A valid signature for the signer will also
be a valid signature of the other Stellar transaction if the ed25519 key used to
sign the payload is also required to sign the other transaction.

An ed25519 signed payload signer can be constructed for each subsequent
transaction that needs authorizing, and included in the `extraSigners`
precondition of the first transadction. This will require the signatures of all
subsequent transactions to be disclosed on the first transaction.

While it is possible to achieve a similar effect of this proposal with the
existing protocol by using the preauth transaction signer, use of that signer
requires creating a new ledger entry which is impractical in contracts with
multiple iterations.

The maximum size of the set of transactions is three, limited to being one
more than the maximum number of `extraSigners` specified in [CAP-21], currently
two, and can be increased past three if the maximum size of `extraSigners` is
changed.

The hint is specified as an XOR of the last 4 bytes of all elements of the
signer – the ed25519 public key and the payload – so as to reduce the number of
decorated signatures validators must verify in full. If the hint for the signed
payload used only the ed25519 public key as input, like an ed25519 signer does,
a transaction that requires signatures by an ed25519 key for a signed payload
signer and an ed25519 signer would have two decorated signatures with the same
hint. Validators would be required to compare the full signature twice for both
signers, rather than once if the hint allows for pruning signers of the
different type.

### Payment Channels

In the payment channel designs specified in [CAP-21] this proposal simplifies
the requirements on when participants may exchange signatures for transactions.

The following paragraph in CAP-21:

>To update the payment channel state, the parties 1) increment i, 2)
>sign and exchange a closing transaction C_i, and finally 3) sign and
>exchange a declaration transaction D_i.

May be changed to:

>To update the payment channel state, the parties 1) increment i, 2)
>sign and exchange a closing transaction C_i and declaration
>transaction D_i.

This changes the number of messages the parties must send to each other to 
update the payment channel, reducing the number from three to two. It reduces 
the number of messages down to one for any the payment channel implementation 
where the receiving party of a payment update is the beneficiary.

Three messages using CAP-21:
```
+---+        +---+
| A |        | B |
+---+        +---+
  |            |
  | C_i        |
  |----------->|
  |            |
  |   C_i, D_i |
  |<-----------|
  |            |
  | D_i        |
  |----------->|
  |            |
```

Simplified two message process using CAP-21 and CAP-40:
```
+---+        +---+
| A |        | B |
+---+        +---+
  |            |
  | C_i, D_i   |
  |----------->|
  |            |
  |   C_i, D_i |
  |<-----------|
  |            |
```

Simplified one message process using CAP-21 and CAP-40 where B is the only 
beneficiary of the update, supporting queue-like processing of payments:
```
+---+        +---+
| A |        | B |
+---+        +---+
  |            |
  | C_i, D_i   |
  |----------->|
  |            |
```

This simplified exchange would be implemented by requiring the sender of a
payment to include in D_i the `extraSigners` precondition with an ed25519 signed
payload signer where the payload is the transaction hash of C_i and the ed25519
public key is the public key of the receiving participant that must sign D_i and
C_i.

The effect of this change is the receiving participant must sign the transaction
hash of C_i to authorize D_i, embedding their signature for C_i into D_i. If the
receiving participant nefariously authorizes and submits D_i without sharing a
signature for C_i, the sender who is watching the network may see D_i be
submitted, extract the signature for C_i from the signatures on D_i, attach the
signature to C_i, and submit C_i.

The use of the payload signer in CAP-21's payment channel requires a payload of
32 bytes to store the hash of another Stellar transaction. 32 bytes are required
because Stellar transaction hashes utilize the SHA-256 algorithm.

### Other Uses

This new signer is likely to have other applications in scenarios similar to
where HASH_X signers are currently used, except that the data revealed would not
only be a hash shared by multiple transactions across multiple chains, but could
be a signature for a hash validated by a smart contract on another chain, or a
signature for any other use. However, this has limited use to only signatures of
ed25519 keys as specified.

The use of the payload signer in these other applications could require a
variety of different payload sizes. It would be impractical to permit large
payloads without changes to Stellar's fee participation because the sizes of
transactions and account sub-entries in the ledger could explode.

A payload with a maximum length of 64 bytes, rather than 32 bytes, would support
payloads that are hashes for most hashing algorithms defined today – e.g.
SHA-384, SHA-512 – which may support future cross-chain applications that choose
to use ed25519 signatures of hashes.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

This proposal is backwards compatible.

### Resource Utilization

No substantial changes to resource utilization.

The size of signatures, and therefore transactions, remain the same.

The effort to verify the signature is equivalent to the effort to verify an
ed25519 signature.

The size of signers stored in the ledger will be 3x the size, at 96 bytes,
for ed25519 signed payload signers compared to 32 bytes for all other signers.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Security Concerns

If a transaction requires the signature of a Signed Payload Signer and a signer
signs it without understanding the preimage of the payload, the signer could be
authorizing another Stellar transaction if the payload is a Stellar transaciton
hash, or the signer could be authorizing some other operation on another network
or application. People and applications should never sign a hash that they do
not completely understand the consequences of signing, in all the contexts that
their key provides authentication or authorization. People and applications
should never sign a transaction they do not completely understand. There are
many cases where signing a transaction not completely understood can pose a
security concern for the signer because the signer could be authorizing
something they would not approve of if they did understand the transaction. This
proposal introduces a new case with the Signed Payload Signer.

## Implementation

None yet.

[CAP-21]: ./cap-0021.md
