## Preamble

```
CAP: 0017
Title: Update LastModifiedLedgerSeq If and Only If LedgerEntry is Modified
Author: Jonathan Jove
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-02-01
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/stellar-dev/hzemjh1aIwc
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
This proposal makes specifying and implementing the protocol easier by simplifying the semantics of `LedgerEntry.lastModifiedLedgerSeq`.

## Abstract
It is currently possible for `LedgerEntry.lastModifiedLedgerSeq` to be updated by an operation even if that operation did not make any modifications to the underlying data of that `LedgerEntry`. This document proposes changing the semantics of `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` to be updated by an operation if and only if the underlying data of that `LedgerEntry` has changed.

## Motivation
The main benefit of this proposal is that implementing the protocol would be simpler. The current behavior forces implementers to carefully manage whether `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` should or should not be updated in any given circumstance. The only reliable way for an implementer to determine when `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` should be updated in the current protocol version is by referring to an existing implementation. This proposal would unambiguously specify when `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` should and should not be updated.

For example, using `AllowTrust` to authorize a trustline that is already authorized will update the `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` of the trustline without making any other modifications. In contrast, a tentative winner of `Inflation` that ends up winning nothing (due to, for example, having excessive native asset liabilities) is unchanged and does not receive an updated `lastModifiedLedgerSeq`.

## Specification
The value of `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` should be updated by an operation if and only if the net effect of that operation includes updating the underlying data of a `LedgerEntry`. Specifically, if `leBefore` and `leAfter` are the `LedgerEntry` (excluding `lastModifiedLedgerSeq`) before and after the operation has been applied, respectively, then `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` should be updated to `LedgerHeader.ledgerSeq` if and only if `leBefore != leAfter`.

## Rationale
This proposal is to be applied at the operation level as it guarantees that if the net effect of any operation in a transaction set includes updating the underlying data of a `LedgerEntry` then the value of `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` will be updated. This behavior is desirable from an implementation perspective because it allows each operation to correctly determine whether `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` should be updated without any knowledge of whether the `LedgerEntry` has been or will be modified by other operations in the same transaction set.

## Backwards Compatibility
Downstream systems which rely on `lastModifiedLedgerSeq` could be effected as the semantics of that field will change.

## Test Cases
None yet.

## Implementation
No implementation yet.
