## Preamble

```
CAP: 0016
Title: Cosigned assets: NopOp and COAUTHORIZED_FLAG
Authors: David Mazières
Status: Draft
Created: 2018-01-24
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/issues/146
Protocol version: TBD
```

# Motivation

A number of Stellar asset issuers need greater control over assets
than simply authorizing particular accounts to hold the asset.  As a
result, we are seeing people build solutions in which the asset issuer
is actually a co-signer on asset holders' accounts.  This solution has
several drawbacks.  In particular, the asset owner cannot unilaterally
withdraw XLM or other assets from his or her account, and it is very
hard to trade one such restricted asset for another (as both issuers
would need to be cosigners on the account, giving one issuer
permission to authorize transactions on the other's asset).

This proposal is a first cut at attempting to address the problem
through minimal stellar-core changes.

# Co-signer authorized trust lines

To accommodate asset issuers with restrictions, we propose adding
another mode for trustlines of `AUTH_REQUIRED` assets, called
"cosigner authorized," that lies somewhere between being not
authorized and fully authorized.  The idea is to allow issuers to
require asset holders to request co-signing of transactions involving
the asset without being cosigners on asset holders' accounts.

```c
enum TrustLineFlags
{
    // issuer has authorized account to perform transactions with its credit
    AUTHORIZED_FLAG = 1,
    // issuer allows transactions that are co-signed by issuer low threshold
    COAUTHORIZED_FLAG = 2
};
```

There are now three modes for the trustline of an `AUTH_REQUIRED`
asset, based on `TrustLineEntry::flags`:

* If `(flags & 3) == 0`, the source account is not authorized.  Any
  `PAYMENT`, `PATH_PAYMENT`, `MANAGE_OFFER`, or
  `CREATE_PASSIVE_OFFER`, with the source account causes the whole
  transaction to fail, with only two exceptions:

    * A `PATH_PAYMENT` is allowed to contain the asset in `path`, so
      long as it does not apear in `sendAsset` or `destAsset`, and

    * A `MANAGE_OFFER` is allowed if it sets `amount` to 0 (to delete
      the offer).

  In addition, any operation with a different (even authorized) source
  account will fail if it attempts to send the asset to an account
  with `(flags & 3) == 0`.  Finally, existing orders on the order book
  belonging to the account with `(flags & 3) == 0` are immediately
  invalid and cannot be filled.  This behavior should be close or
  identical to the status quo.

* If `(flags & 3) == COAUTHORIZED_FLAG` for an account, then the
  account has certain additional permissions compared to when those
  bits are 0.  Specifically:

    * The account's offers in the order book continue to be valid, and
      can be filled at any time.

    * The account can use `MANAGE_OFFER` to reduce the `amount` of an
      offer involving the asset (including canceling the offer with
      and `amount` of 0), but not to increase the offer.

    * The account can receive (but not send) payments and path
      payments in the asset, up to the `limit` of the trustline.

  However, any other operation on the asset requires that the
  transaction be co-signed by the asset issuer at low threshold.
  Moreover, if the account increases the `limit` on the trustline and
  the transaction is not cosigned by the issuer, then the
  `COAUTHORIZED_FLAG` is cleared so `(flags & 3)` goes back to 0.

* If `(flags & 3) == AUTHORIZED_FLAG`, then the account can perform
  arbitrary transactions on the asset, including sending payments to
  accounts with `COAUTHORIZED_FLAG`.

# Operation changes

Implementing cosigned assets requires changes to two operations.
Because an asset issuer's signature may be out of place on a
transaction requiring asset issuer coauthorization, we add a `NopOp`
operation that requires a signature from an arbitrary source account.
Such an operation will be useful in other contexts, too, as currently
pre-authorized transactions sometimes require ugly hacks like having
an account send one Stroup to itself.  Second, we have to modify
`ALLOW_TRUST` to enable issuers to set the new `COAUTHORIZED_FLAG`.

## `NO_OPERATION` (`NopOp`)

The `NO_OPERATION` operation does nothing, but requires a valid
signature from the operation's source account.  Since the default
source account is the source of the transaction, this will always
succeed at low threshold if the operation's `sourceAccount` is
`NULL`.  However, it can be used to require a low threshold signature
from an asset issuer.

```c
enum NopOp {
    LOW_THRESHOLD = 0,
    MED_THRESHOLD = 1,
    HIGH_THRESHOLD = 2
};

enum NopResult {
    NOP_SUCCESS = 0,
    NOP_BAD_THRESHOLD = -1,  // the operation was an invalid value
};

enum OperationType
{
    ...
    BUMP_SEQUENCE = 11,
    NO_OPERATION = 12
};

struct Operation
{
    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    case NO_OPERATION:
        NopOp nopOp;
    }
    body;
};

union OperationResult switch (OperationResultCode code)
{
case opINNER:
    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
        ...
    case NO_OPERATION:
        NopResult nopResult;
    }
    tr;
default:
    void;
};
```

`NopOp` is not strictly necessary, as a redundant `ALLOW_TRUST` can be
used instead, but having `NopOp` is cleaner and has other applications
to pre-authorized transactions.

## `ALLOW_TRUST` flags

Only one small change is required to `AllowTrustOp`.  We change the
`authorize` field from a `bool` to a `uint32`.  This provides binary
compatibility with clients that do not know about the
`COAUTHORIZED_FLAG` (since `AUTHORIZED_FLAG == TRUE` in XDR), but
having a `uint32` provides the additional option of setting it to
`COAUTHORIZED_FLAG`.

```c
struct AllowTrustOp
{
    AccountID trustor;
    union switch (AssetType type)
    {
    // ASSET_TYPE_NATIVE is not allowed
    case ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM4:
        opaque assetCode4[4];

    case ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12:
        opaque assetCode12[12];

        // add other asset types here in the future
    }
    asset;

    // 0, AUTHORIZED_FLAG, or COAUTHORIZED_FLAG
    uint32 authorize;
};
```
