## Preamble

```
CAP: 0015
Title: Fee-Bump Transactions
Author: Jonathan Jove, OrbitLens <orbit.lens@gmail.com>
Status: Implemented
Created: 2018-11-26
Updated: 2019-12-03
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/stellar-dev/ckzBRlfr2VU
Protocol version: 13
```

## Simple Summary
This proposal introduces fee-bump transactions, which allow an arbitrary account
to pay the fee for a transaction.

## Motivation
If a transaction has insufficient `fee`, for example due to either surge
pricing or an increase in the `baseFee`, that transaction will not be included
in a transaction set. If the transaction is only signed by the party that wants
to execute it then it is possible to simply craft a new transaction with higher
fee, sign it, and submit it. But there are many circumstances where this is not
possible, such as when pre-signed and pre-authorized transactions are involved.
In these cases, it is possible that a high-value transaction (such as the
release of escrowed funds or the settlement of a payment channel) cannot
execute as of protocol version 12. Fee-bump transactions will resolve this issue
by enabling anyone to pay the fee for an already existing transaction.

The mechanism described here will also facilitate another usage: when applications
(such as games) are willing to pay user fees. As of protocol version 12, this
could be resolved in two ways. In the first approach, funds could be sent
directly to the users' account but there is no guarantee that the user will
spend those funds on fees and there is no way to recover unspent funds. In the
second approach, one or more accounts controlled by the application could be
used as the source account for user transactions but this leads to sequence
number management issues.

### Goals Alignment
This proposal is aligned with several Stellar Network Goals, among them:

- The Stellar Network should facilitate simplicity and interoperability with
other protocols and networks.
- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects
to create highly usable products.

## Abstract
`TransactionEnvelope` is transformed from an XDR `struct` to an XDR `union`
while preserving binary compatibility. `FeeBumpTransaction` is introduced with
corresponding envelope type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP` as a new type of
transaction. Fee-bump transactions as described in this proposal will enable any
account to pay the fee for an existing transaction without the need to re-sign
the existing transaction or manage sequence numbers.

## Specification

### XDR
The new transaction, transaction envelope, and related XDR types are:
```c++
enum EnvelopeType
{
    ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0 = 0,
    ENVELOPE_TYPE_SCP = 1,
    ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX = 2,
    ENVELOPE_TYPE_AUTH = 3,
    ENVELOPE_TYPE_SCPVALUE = 4,
    ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP = 5
};

struct TransactionV1Envelope
{
    Transaction tx;
    /* Each decorated signature is a signature over the SHA256 hash of
     * a TransactionSignaturePayload */
    DecoratedSignature signatures<20>;
};

struct TransactionV0
{
    uint256 sourceAccountEd25519;
    uint32 fee;
    SequenceNumber seqNum;
    TimeBounds* timeBounds;
    Memo memo;
    Operation operations<100>;
    union switch (int v) {
    case 0:
        void;
    } ext;
};

struct TransactionV0Envelope
{
    TransactionV0 tx;
    /* Each decorated signature is a signature over the SHA256 hash of
     * a TransactionSignaturePayload */
    DecoratedSignature signatures<20>;
};

struct FeeBumpTransaction
{
    AccountID feeSource;
    int64 fee;
    union switch (EnvelopeType type)
    {
    case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX:
        TransactionV1Envelope v1;
    } innerTx;
    union switch (int v) {
    case 0:
        void;
    } ext;
};

struct FeeBumpTransactionEnvelope
{
    FeeBumpTransaction tx;
    /* Each decorated signature is a signature over the SHA256 hash of
     * a TransactionSignaturePayload */
    DecoratedSignature signatures<20>;
};

union TransactionEnvelope switch (EnvelopeType type) {
case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0:
    TransactionV0Envelope v0;
case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX:
    TransactionV1Envelope v1;
case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP:
    FeeBumpTransactionEnvelope feeBump;
};

struct TransactionSignaturePayload
{
    Hash networkId;
    union switch (EnvelopeType type)
    {
    // Backwards Compatibility: Use ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX to sign ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0
    case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX:
        Transaction tx;
    case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP:
        FeeBumpTransaction feeBump;
    }
    taggedTransaction;
};
```

The new transaction result XDR types are:
```c++
enum TransactionResultCode
{
    // .... txSUCCESS, ..., txINTERNAL_ERROR unchanged ....
    txNOT_SUPPORTED = -12,  // transaction type not supported
    txINNER_FAILED = -13    // fee bump inner transaction failed
};

struct InnerTransactionResult
{
    int64 feeCharged;

    union switch (TransactionResultCode code)
    {
    // txSUCCESS is not included
    case txFAILED:
        OperationResult results<>;
    case txTOO_EARLY:
    case txTOO_LATE:
    case txMISSING_OPERATION:
    case txBAD_SEQ:
    case txBAD_AUTH:
    case txINSUFFICIENT_BALANCE:
    case txNO_ACCOUNT:
    case txINSUFFICIENT_FEE:
    case txBAD_AUTH_EXTRA:
    case txINTERNAL_ERROR:
    case txNOT_SUPPORTED:
    // txINNER_FAILED is not included
        void;
    }
    result;

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};

struct TransactionResult
{
    int64 feeCharged; // actual fee charged for the transaction

    union switch (TransactionResultCode code)
    {
    case txSUCCESS:
    case txFAILED:
        OperationResult results<>;
    case txINNER_FAILED:
        InnerTransactionResult innerResult;
    default:
        void;
    }
    result;

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};
```

### Semantics

#### Fee Rate
A fee-bump transaction has an effective number of operations equal to one plus
the number of operations in the inner transaction. Correspondingly, the minimum
fee for the fee-bump transaction is one base fee more than the minimum fee for
the inner transaction. Similarly, the fee rate (see CAP-0005) is normalized by
one plus the number of operations in the inner transaction rather than the
number of operations in the inner transaction alone.

#### Validity
Prior to the protocol version in which this proposal is implemented,
only a `TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` can be valid whereas
a `TransactionEnvelope` of any other type will be invalid with result
`txNOT_SUPPORTED`. Starting in the protocol version in which this proposal is
implemented, only a `TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX` or
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP` can be valid whereas a `TransactionEnvelope` of any
other type will be invalid with result `txNOT_SUPPORTED`. Because
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` and `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX` require the same signatures,
`TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` can simply be converted to
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX`.

Validity requirements for a `TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX` are
identical to the existing validity requirements for a `TransactionEnvelope` of
type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0`.

To validate a `TransactionEnvelope E` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP` with
inner transaction envelope `F = E.feeBump().tx.innerTx`, check that

- `E.feeBump().tx.fee` is at least the minimum fee, otherwise return
  `txINSUFFICIENT_FEE`
- The fee rate for `E` is at least the fee rate of `F`, otherwise return
  `txINSUFFICIENT_FEE`
- `E.feeBump().tx.feeSource` exists, otherwise return `txNO_ACCOUNT`
- `E.feeBump().signatures` contains signatures for `E.feeBump().tx` with total
  weight at least equal to the low threshold for `E.feeBump().tx.feeSource`
  (pre-authorized transaction hashes are implicitly included here), otherwise
  return `txBAD_AUTH`
- `E.feeBump().tx.feeSource` has sufficient available native balance (see
  CAP-0003) to pay `E.feeBump().tx.fee` in addition to fees that will be paid by
  this account for other transactions, otherwise return `txINSUFFICIENT_BALANCE`
- `F` is valid, except that
    - `F.v1().tx.fee` may be less than the minimum fee for `F`, but must be
      non-negative
    - `F.v1().tx.sourceAccount` may not have sufficient available native balance

  otherwise return `txINNER_FAILED` with the inner result set to the result of
  validating `F`

#### Replace-by-Fee
If a node receives a valid `TransactionEnvelope E'` with source account `A` and
sequence number `N` when it already has a `TransactionEnvelope E` with source
account `A` and sequence number `N` in the transaction queue, then it should
replace `E` with `E'` if and only if the fee rate for `E'` is at least 10 times
the fee rate for `E`. It should be emphasized that source account in this
section refers specifically to the source account of the _sequence number_ of
the transaction, although these transactions may still have different fee source
accounts.

#### Surge Pricing
The logic for surge pricing is unchanged. The only new consideration is that a
`TransactionEnvelope E` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP` should be included
in the queue for `E.feeBump().tx.innerTx.v1().sourceAccount` rather than the
queue for `E.feeBump().tx.feeSource`.

#### Application and Results
Even if the outer transaction of a fee-bump is invalid during application, we
will still apply the inner transaction. Specifically, the behavior is:

- Remove used one-time signers for the outer transaction
- Apply the inner transaction (as if there were no outer transaction)

If the inner transaction succeeds, the result is `txSUCCESS` and the operation
results of the inner transaction are returned. If the inner transaction fails,
the result is `txINNER_FAILED` and the result of the inner transaction is
returned. This specifically ensures that there is a bijection between the
transactions in `TransactionSet` the results in `TransactionResultSet`.

## Rationale

### Make ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0 Invalid
This proposal uses the same signatures for `TransactionEnvelope` of type
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` and `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX`. This makes it possible to convert
a `TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` into a
`TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX` without needing new signatures.
The main advantage of this is it allows us to make `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` invalid
and only support `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX` in `FeeBumpTransaction`. Furthermore, making
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` invalid simplifies the possibility of having a "canonical"
or "normalized" XDR representation of a `TransactionEnvelope` (this concept has
arisen during the discussion of some CAPs in the past).

### Replay Prevention
`FeeBumpTransaction` does not contain an explicit sequence number because it
relies on the sequence number of the inner transaction for replay prevention.

### Fees
A fee-bump transaction has an effective number of operations strictly greater
than the number of operations in the inner transaction because it requires more
work for the network to process a fee-bump transaction than the inner
transaction alone.

The semantics specify that a fee-bump transaction is invalid if the fee rate of
the outer transaction does not exceed the fee rate of the inner transaction.
This restriction is designed to prevent an obvious misunderstanding of the
semantics of `FeeBumpTransaction`. Suppose someone has a signed transaction with
fee `F`, but they actually do not want to pay a fee greater than `F'`. So they
use a `FeeBumpTransaction` with the outer fee set to `F'`. But if the outer
fee rate is less than the inner fee rate, then in any case where the fee-bump
could be included in the transaction set the inner transaction could also have
been included. This completely defeats the purpose of submitting the
`FeeBumpTransaction` with fee `F'` because a malicious adversary could always
cause you to pay fee `F`. Therefore we prohibit this possibility entirely.

### Application and Results
The only purpose of a fee-bump transaction is to bid a higher fee for the inner
transaction to either make the transaction valid in the event that the fee rate
is less than the base fee, or to accelerate inclusion of the transaction in the
event of surge pricing. In either case, the fee-bump has fulfilled its role once
it has been included in the transaction set. The source account for each
transaction is charged the fee before any transactions are actually applied, so
all that remains when applying a fee-bump transaction is to remove used one-time
signers and to apply the inner transaction.

There are several reasons that the inner transaction must be applied regardless
of the validity of the outer transaction at apply time. The most important
reason is replay protection: as noted above, the sequence number of the inner
transaction provides replay protection for the fee-bump transaction. If the
inner transaction were not applied when the outer transaction became invalid at
apply time, then the sequence number would not be consumed in that case. This
would allow the fee-bump transaction to be played again if the outer transaction
were to become valid again.

Given the above, there is no reason to return the result of the fee-bump
transaction separately from the result of the inner transaction.

## Backwards Incompatibilities
All downstream systems which submit transactions to stellar-core will need to
transform `TransactionEnvelope` of type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0` to type
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX` before submission. As a temporary bridge, stellar-core will
perform this transformation for transactions submitted to the HTTP endpoint.
But this bridge will not work for the newly introduced `FeeBumpTransactions`,
which will need explicit support for transaction normalization in downstream
systems.

It follows from the above that downstream systems that submit transactions will
continue to function, but downstream systems that process historical
transactions will need to be updated with the new XDR.

## Security Concerns
None yet.

## Test Cases
None yet.

## Implementation
None yet.
