## Preamble

```
CAP: 0009
Title: Linear/Exterior Immutable Accounts
Author: Jeremy Rubin
Status: Draft
Created: 2018-13
Discussion: None
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

When we are aspiring to merge an account and remove trustlines, we need to get
our account in a predictable state. This CAP introduces Linear Accounts (or
Exterior Immutable Accounts) which restricts an account to only allow transactions where
the account is the source to modify the account.

## Abstract

Sometimes we want to be sure of exactly what the state of an account is when we
are generating certain operations: we want to know exactly how much balance
should be available, we want to know that no sequence bumps can occur
externally, etc. Currently it's difficult to ensure this. 

Linear Accounts are a sort of "critical section" mode for an account which
prevents outside operations from taking place.

## Motivation

Currently, when you want to merge an account you send all of the available lumen
balance to the merge recipient -- but what if a new payment just came in!
They'll get more money than expected! This is ok sometimes, but usually is a big
problem!

This problem is even worse for trustlines. Trustlines have a limit. In order to
remove a trustline it must have no assets in it, otherwise it will fail. If a
transaction sends all the balance in the trustline (which must be explicitly
declared) and then reduces the limit to zero, the transaction may fail if
another transaction sends funds to the account before it. An attacker can use
this to essentially DoS account merging by pinging one stroop of random assets
to your account.

This prevents merging because all trustlines must be removed to merge.


## Specification

For Linear accounts, we introduce three new flags, `AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE`,
`AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE_ACTION`, and `AUTH_PARTIAL_LINEAR`.

If `AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE` is set, then transactions which attempt to modify
the state of the account in any way are either invalid or fail (determined by
`AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE_ACTION` -- set : fail, unset : invalid), unless the modification occurs as a result of
an offer executing or a transaction with the account as the source.

If `AUTH_PARTIAL_LINEAR` is set, then operations which modify the account simply
encumber an additional signature obligation on behalf of the account being
modified. This signature is unique in that if a EdDSA signature, it signs `SHA256(AUTH_PARTIAL_LINEAR || TX Hash || Account
Modified)`. Such signatures replace signatures from the same key already on the
transaction if present, and must come after all regular signatures in the
DecoratedSignature list.

If `AUTH_IMMUTABLE` is set, then the flags may not be changed (continues to work
as before). `AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE`, `AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE_ACTION`, and
`AUTH_PARTIAL_LINEAR` may be set when `AUTH_IMMUTABLE` is set.


## Rationale

This design accomplishes several orthogonal goals:

1. Temporary suspensions of mutability (achieved via
   `AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE_ACTION=invalid`) which is assumed to
   quickly resume. This allowss for whatever critical section to be handled
   without needing to re-sign transactions
1. Permanent suspensions of mutability (achieved via
   `AUTH_EXTERIOR_IMMUTABLE_ACTION=fail`) which permanently
   prevents the transaction from succeeding.
1. Receiver-approved transactions via `AUTH_PARTIAL_LINEAR`/not invalidating
   things which have already been signed via a pre-signed transaction.
1. Provides a mechanism (via `AUTH_IMMUTABLE`) to prove that this will *never*
   be enabled.


The EdDSA signatures are special cased to include the account they are signing
on to prevent the 'confused deputy' from accidentally authorizing a transaction
linearization where it was not desired. It is not particularly expensive given
the mandate that 'confused deputy safe' signatures come after regular
signatures. If a future CAP eliminates confused deputy issue, then these
signatures shall still be required to explicitly approve the partial linearity.


## Backwards Compatibility

At first glance, it may seem like this introduces many new ways for transactions
to fail or be invalid. But it does not, because simply merging an account has
the same types of effects -- if the source account of an operation doesn't
exist, then the transaction is invalid, and if the destination of an operation
doesn't exist, then the transaction fails.

Therefore this doesn't materially impact the status quo, other than making it
possible/easier for developers to control accounts.


## Implementation

None yet.
