## Preamble

```
CAP: 0047
Title: Smart Contract Lifecycle
Working Group:
    Owner: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
    Authors: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
    Consulted: Graydon Hoare <@graydon>, Jon Jove <@jonjove>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>
Status: Draft
Created: 2022-05-02
Discussion:
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
This proposal defines the structure of smart contracts on Stellar, and specifies
how users can create them.

## Motivation
The motivation is the same as it is in
[CAP-0046](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0046.md#motivation)
- "The Stellar Network currently supports a rich but fixed repertoire of
transactions. Developers have indicated this repertoire is insufficiently
flexible in adapting to new application needs, and wish to be able to submit
custom turing-complete code to run in the transaction-execution phase of the
network."

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
  create highly usable products

## Abstract
Users need a way to manage smart contracts on the network. This CAP allows users
to upload WASM code into a LedgerEntry. This CAP also lets the validators turn
off all smart contract functionality if some unexpected behavior is found in the
protocol.

## Specification

### XDR

```diff mddiffcheck.base=ce981331000128a1c145ec364fbd83d3dd4be5ed
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
index 3eb578f16..5b3fe884d 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
@@ -491,6 +491,35 @@ struct LiquidityPoolEntry
     body;
 };
 
+enum ConfigSettingType
+{
+    CONFIG_TYPE_UINT32 = 1
+};
+
+union ConfigSetting switch (ConfigSettingType type)
+{
+case CONFIG_TYPE_UINT32:
+    uint32 uint32Val;
+};
+
+enum ConfigSettingID
+{
+    CONFIG_TYPE_CONTRACT_MAX_SIZE = 1
+};
+
+struct ConfigurationEntry
+{
+    union switch (int v)
+    {
+    case 0:
+        void;
+    }
+    ext;
+    
+    ConfigSettingID id;
+    ConfigSetting setting;
+};
+
 struct LedgerEntryExtensionV1
 {
     SponsorshipDescriptor sponsoringID;
@@ -521,6 +550,8 @@ struct LedgerEntry
         ClaimableBalanceEntry claimableBalance;
     case LIQUIDITY_POOL:
         LiquidityPoolEntry liquidityPool;
+    case CONFIG:
+        ConfigurationEntry globalContractConfig;
     }
     data;
 
@@ -575,6 +606,11 @@ case LIQUIDITY_POOL:
     {
         PoolID liquidityPoolID;
     } liquidityPool;
+case CONFIG:
+    struct
+    {
+        ConfigSettingID configID;
+    } config;
 };
 
 // list of all envelope types used in the application
@@ -589,6 +625,8 @@ enum EnvelopeType
     ENVELOPE_TYPE_SCPVALUE = 4,
     ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP = 5,
     ENVELOPE_TYPE_OP_ID = 6,
-    ENVELOPE_TYPE_POOL_REVOKE_OP_ID = 7
+    ENVELOPE_TYPE_POOL_REVOKE_OP_ID = 7,
+    ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ED25519 = 8,
+    ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_CONTRACT = 9
 };
 }
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x
index 84b84cbf7..97ffc5979 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger.x
@@ -47,13 +47,15 @@ struct StellarValue
     ext;
 };
 
-const MASK_LEDGER_HEADER_FLAGS = 0x7;
+const MASK_LEDGER_HEADER_FLAGS = 0x1F;
 
 enum LedgerHeaderFlags
 {
     DISABLE_LIQUIDITY_POOL_TRADING_FLAG = 0x1,
     DISABLE_LIQUIDITY_POOL_DEPOSIT_FLAG = 0x2,
-    DISABLE_LIQUIDITY_POOL_WITHDRAWAL_FLAG = 0x4
+    DISABLE_LIQUIDITY_POOL_WITHDRAWAL_FLAG = 0x4,
+    DISABLE_CONTRACT_CREATE = 0x8,
+    DISABLE_CONTRACT_INVOKE = 0x10
 };
 
 struct LedgerHeaderExtensionV1
@@ -122,7 +124,8 @@ enum LedgerUpgradeType
     LEDGER_UPGRADE_BASE_FEE = 2,
     LEDGER_UPGRADE_MAX_TX_SET_SIZE = 3,
     LEDGER_UPGRADE_BASE_RESERVE = 4,
-    LEDGER_UPGRADE_FLAGS = 5
+    LEDGER_UPGRADE_FLAGS = 5,
+    LEDGER_UPGRADE_CONFIG = 6
 };
 
 union LedgerUpgrade switch (LedgerUpgradeType type)
@@ -137,6 +140,12 @@ case LEDGER_UPGRADE_BASE_RESERVE:
     uint32 newBaseReserve; // update baseReserve
 case LEDGER_UPGRADE_FLAGS:
     uint32 newFlags; // update flags
+case LEDGER_UPGRADE_CONFIG:
+    struct
+    {
+        ConfigSettingID id; // id to update
+        ConfigSetting setting; // new value
+    } config
 };
 
 /* Entries used to define the bucket list */
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
index 23918226d..7e47aac92 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
@@ -545,6 +545,18 @@ case ENVELOPE_TYPE_POOL_REVOKE_OP_ID:
         PoolID liquidityPoolID;
         Asset asset;
     } revokeID;
+case ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ED25519:
+    struct
+    {
+        uint256 ed25519;
+        uint256 salt;
+    } ed25519ContractID;
+case ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_CONTRACT:
+    struct
+    {
+        Hash contractID;
+        uint256 salt;
+    } contractID;
 };
 
 enum MemoType
```

## Semantics

### Creating a contract using InvokeHostFunctionOp
This CAP specifies a `create_contract_from_ed25519` host function, which will
create a new `ContractDataEntry` from
[CAP-0053](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0053.md)
with a `SCV_STATIC` key type, and `SCS_LEDGER_KEY_CONTRACT_CODE_WASM` key value.
The contractID will be the SHA-256 hash of a `HashIDPreimage`, with type
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ED25519`, which contains a public key, and a
salt provided by the user. The `create_contract_from_ed25519` host function also
does some validation to ensure the contract and contractID are created securely.

The `InvokeHostFunctionOp` operation from
[CAP-0052](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0052.md),
if used with `function = HostFunction::HOST_FN_CREATE_CONTRACT`, will call into
`create_contract_from_ed25519`. The `parameters` field should be populated with
a `ScVec` that contains the four `ScVal` parameters for
`create_contract_from_ed25519` (these are `contract`, `salt`, `key`, `sig`).

Note that there is no nonce, so `create_contract_from_ed25519` can be replayed. This only
matters if we add functionality for deleting contracts, and we allow
contractID's to be reused. We don't want to allow reusable contractID's even
with removable contracts, so this shouldn't be an issue.

The transaction will fail if a contract with the calculated contractID already
exists.

TODO: Reserve requirement for `ContractDataEntry`?

```rust
// Define CREATE_CONTRACT_SEPARATOR =
//     "create_contract_from_ed25519(contract: Vec<u8>, salt: u256, key: u256, sig: Vec<u8>)"
// Verifies that sha256(params) was signed by key
//     params = vec![CREATE_SEPARATOR, salt, contract]
//     key = key
//     sig = sig
// Creates a new contract.
fn create_contract_from_ed25519(contract: Vec<u8>, salt: Vec<u8>, key: u256, sig: Vec<u8>) -> ContractID;
```

### Creating a contract within a contract
Factory contracts are quite popular already on other networks, so this CAP adds
functionality to support them. The contractID for these contracts are generated
a little differently than a contract created using `InvokeHostFunctionOp` for
simplicity. The `create_contract_from_contract` call will create the new
contractID by taking the SHA-256 hash of a `HashIDPreimage`, with type
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_CONTRACT`, which contains the creating contracts
contractID, and a salt that the creating contract passes to
`create_contract_from_contract`.

`create_contract_from_contract` will trap if it is not called from within
another contract.

Contract creators still have the option to use `create_contract_from_ed25519` if they choose to.
This can be helpful in factory contracts where the salt is specified by the
contract caller.

```rust
// Can only be used inside another contract. Will use the creating contracts contractID.
fn create_contract_from_contract(contract: Vec<u8>, salt: Vec<u8>) -> ContractID
```

TODO: How does this work with the new fee model?

### Configuration settings using Ledger Upgrades
This CAP also adds a mechanism for validators to store and update configuration
options using ledger upgrades. The maximum WASM contract size will be set during
the protocol upgrade using a new `ConfigurationEntry`, with `ConfigSettingID` ==
`CONFIG_TYPE_CONTRACT_MAX_SIZE`, and `ConfigSetting.uint32Val` == `16384`. This
new entry can be updated using a `LedgerUpgrade`. This mechanism is generalized
to allow validators to update any configuration settings we add. Note that
validators cannot add or remove configuration settings using `LedgerUpgrades`.
New configurations need to be added during the protocol upgrade.

### Validator override
This proposal adds two new `LedgerHeader` flags that can disable the create and
invoke contract operations using upgrades. The validators can use this mechanism
in case unexpected behaviour is seen. We also considered adding a mechanism for
validators to opt accounts into smart contracts to allow for a "soft" launch,
but the implementation changes to get this to work are not simple. The
validators have the `LedgerHeader` overrides to fall back on, so it's not clear
that the complexity of adding a "soft" launch mechanism is worth it.

## Design Rationale

### There are no built in controls for contracts
Controls like pausing invocation or mutability for all or a subset of a contract
should be put into a contract itself. Leaving it to the contract writer is a much
more general solution than baking it into the protocol. The downside is this is
more error prone and will take more space since the same logic will be
implemented multiple times.

### ContractDataEntry has no account associated with it
The account that creates the `ContractDataEntry` that contains the contract code
is not tied to it in any way. This allows for contract management and
authorization to be handled in the contract using whichever custom mechanism the
contract creator chooses.

### Contracts cannot be updated and deleted
The contract code is stored in a `ContractDataEntry`, but contract code cannot
be updated or deleted in the initial version. The host functions in
[CAP-0053](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0053.md#host-function-additions)
to update or delete `ContractDataEntry` should trap if they are used on contract
code.

### Malicious contracts
The validators do not have a mechanism to ban specific contracts. Any kind of
targeted banning mechanism can be worked around quite easily by creating new
accounts and contracts.

### Maximum WASM contract code size is configurable
The maximum contract size will be set during the protocol upgrade, and can be
updated by the validators. This limit should be enforced in the
`create_contract_from_ed25519` host function.

### There are two ways to derive ContractIDs
Pulling contractIDs from `LedgerHeader.idPool` would be easier but it would make
parallelizing contract creation more difficult in the future. It's also more
difficult to determine what the contractID will be since the id pool would be
used by offers and other contracts. This CAP uses a `Hash` instead as the
contractID. 

You can either use `create_contract_from_ed25519` or
`create_contract_from_contract`. `create_contract_from_ed25519` is needed if it
is called from `InvokeHostFunctionOp` since there is no creating contract (and
therefore no existing contractID). It is also helpful in situations where the
salt is provided by the user in a factory contract.
`create_contract_from_ed25519` uses a ED25519 with signature verification, so
you can guarantee your contract ID won't be taken.
`create_contract_from_contract` can only be used from within another contract,
but it is much simpler since it just uses the creating contracts contractID and
a salt.

## Security Concerns
The security concerns from CAP-0046
(https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0046.md#security-concerns)
apply here as well. In addition to those concerns, this CAP does not provide
validators with much control over contracts on the network. The only mechanism
they have is blocking all contract creations and invocations, which should only
be used in drastic situations. This CAP does not define a way for validators to
block specific contracts.

## Future Work

### Mutable contract code

We can allow contracts to be updated if we provide a host function and follow a few rules - 

- If a previous call in the call stack is from the modifying contract (e.g. A ->
  B -> C -> B(update)) then the invocation should fail.
- An update should successfully terminate that contracts invocation, but the
  caller can continue (e.g. A -> B(update). B terminates successfully on the
  update host function call without running anything after, but A can continue.
  If A calls B again in the same invocation, it will interact with the updated
  contract)
- A new host function will be provided that takes the new contract code and a
  return value as a parameter. This return value is required because the current
  contract execution will be terminated after the `update_contract` call, but
  the caller may still expect a return value. 
    ```rust
    fn update_contract(contract: Vec<u8>, return_val: SCVal);
    ```

### Contract metadata
A ContractMetadata union can accompany the WASM contract as another
`ContractDataEntry` with a new `SCV_STATIC` key type, which would specify the
functions available in the contract, along with the return and argument types
for each function. The host function to call into the WASM contract should first
validate the contract call against the metadata. If the contract call does not
match one of the functions specified in the metadata, then an error will be
thrown.

Users can also load the ContractMetadata to see what the interface looks like.

This metadata can be extended to include
versioning or the router logic mentioned at the end of this CAP.

TODO: The xdr currently puts an arbitrary limit (10) on the number of function
signatures and arguments in the metadata. This needs to be revisited.

```c++
//SCST_BOOL will match against a SCStatic with either a SCS_TRUE or SCS_FALSE value
enum SCStaticTypeGroups
{
    SCST_VOID = 0,
    SCST_BOOL = 1
};

union SCType switch (SCValType type)
{
case SCV_U63:
case SCV_U32:
case SCV_I32:
    void;
case SCV_STATIC:
    SCStaticTypeGroups staticGroups;
case SCV_OBJECT:
    SCObjectType objType;
case SCV_SYMBOL:
case SCV_BITSET:
case SCV_STATUS:
    void;
};

struct FunctionSignature
{
    SCSymbol function;
    SCType returnType;
    SCType argTypes<10>;
}

enum ContractMetadataType
{
    METADATA_TYPE_V0 = 0
};

union ContractMetadata switch (ContractMetadataType type)
{
case METADATA_TYPE_V0:
    FunctionSignature interface<10>;
};

```
### Include a router along with the raw WASM
A router can be added as a `ContractDataEntry` with a new `SCV_STATIC` key type.

- This has a couple advantages - 
  - A contract function that just calls into another contract can specify that
    route in the router, allowing the initial contract to avoid spinning up a
    WASM VM.
    - Possible routes are - 
      - This contract
      - External contract
      - Host function
  - This will allow contracts to build off the functionality of other contracts
    without having to duplicate existing functionality, saving space on the
    ledger.

#### XDR

```c++
enum CallType
{
    SELF_CONTRACT = 0,
    EXTERNAL_CONTRACT = 1,
    HOST_FUNCTION = 2
};

struct Route
{
    SCSymbol function;

    union switch (CallType v)
    {
    case EXTERNAL_CONTRACT:
        Hash contractID;
    case SELF_CONTRACT:
    case HOST_FUNCTION:
        void;
    } callType;
}
```

