```
CAP: 0051
Title: Smart Contract Host Functionality: Secp256r1 Verification
Working Group:
    Owner: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Authors: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Consulted: Graydon Hoare <@graydon>, Riad S. Wahby <@kwantam>
Status: Awaiting Decision
Created: 2023-01-30
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/discussions/1435
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

Support secp256r1 verification in Soroban contracts via the exported host
interface.

## Motivation

Secp256r1, also sometimes referenced as prime256r1, p256, or ES256, is a common
elliptic curve used with ECDSA. It's one of the common signature algorithms used
in [Webauthn], which is the standard behind passkeys available on, browsers,
computers, and phones. Supporting secp256r1 natively would allow for the
execution of efficient webauthn implementations where-by browsers, computers,
and phones could be the signers of accounts on Stellar via Soroban's custom
account interface. While it is possible to embed ECDSA secp256r1 verification
into contracts on the guest side, the instruction cost of ECDSA verification is
greater than the networks current maximum limits.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
  create highly usable products

## Abstract

This proposal adds one function to the Soroban environment's exported interface
that accepts the parameters needed to verify a secp256r1 signature of a payload
for a public key.

## Specification

A new function `verify_sig_ecdsa_secp256r1` with export name `3` in module `c`
is added to the Soroban environment's exported interface.

It accepts a public key, message, and signature, and verifies that the signature
was produced using the ECDSA signing algorithm with the provided message and the
private key on the secp256r1 curve corresponding to the provided public key.

It returns if the signature is verified, and traps if verification fails.

The `public_key` parameters is a `BytesObject` that must have a length of
65-bytes, being the ECDSA secp256r1 public key SEC-1 encoded.

The `msg_digest` parameters is a `BytesObject` that must be a hash of the
message, and must have been produced using a secure cryptographic hash function,
otherwise an attacker can potentially forge signatures.

The `signature` parameters is a `BytesObject` that must have a length of
64-bytes, with the first 32-bytes being the R-value big endian integer, and the
second 32-bytes being the S-value big endian integer.

The `env.json` in `rs-soroban-env` will be modified as so:

```diff mddiffcheck.ignore=true mddiffcheck.base=v20.1.0
diff --git a/soroban-env-common/env.json b/soroban-env-common/env.json
index df7d5c4..d1d7760 100644
--- a/soroban-env-common/env.json
+++ b/soroban-env-common/env.json
@@ -1958,6 +1958,26 @@
           ],
           "return": "BytesObject",
           "docs": "Recovers the SEC-1-encoded ECDSA secp256k1 public key that produced a given 64-byte signature over a given 32-byte message digest, for a given recovery_id byte."
+        },
+        {
+          "export": "3",
+          "name": "verify_sig_ecdsa_secp256r1",
+          "args": [
+            {
+              "name": "public_key",
+              "type": "BytesObject"
+            },
+            {
+              "name": "msg_digest",
+              "type": "BytesObject"
+            },
+            {
+              "name": "signature",
+              "type": "BytesObject"
+            }
+          ],
+          "return": "Void",
+          "docs": "Verifies that the signature of the prehashed message using the secret key of the public key. The prehash must have been produced by a cryptographic hash function, otherwise an attacker can potentially forge signatures."
         }
       ]
     },
```

### Design Rationale

#### Verify vs Recovery

The interface of the function is different to the existing ECDSA secp256k1 interface because the latter is a recovery interface that recovers a public key given a message, signature, and a recovery ID.

The secp256r1 interface is proposed as a verification interface accepting a public key, message, and signature, because the majority of existing signing software and hardware that support ECDSA secp256r1 do not provide the recovery ID.

To support a recovery interface for secp256r1 the Soroban environment could
perform two recoveries, one with recovery ID 0 and again with recovery ID 1, to
determine all possible matching public keys. Doing so would require two rounds
of recovery and the operations and since the operations take up to 2ms each it
would not be acceptable to do twice.

Alternatively, it would be possible for off-network software to take an ECDSA
public key, message, and signature and derive the recovery ID by performing one
to two verifications off-network. Doing so would require that all clients embed
ECDSA secp256r1 recovery implementations which are not common in non-blockchain
systems, such as browsers or phones implementing webauthn/passkeys.

A motivation to use the alternative recovery interfaces is that it will likely
that contract that use secp256r1 verification will store a public key on chain,
or communicate the public key in invocation parameters. In both cases a
verification interface will require transmission and storage of the full 65-byte
public key. A recovery interface would allow for hashing and truncating the
transmitted or stored public key to 32-bytes if hashed with SHA-256, or 20-bytes
if hashed and truncated similar to how Ethereum addresses are produced. This
space reduction would lower the read/write resource usages as well as
transactions size, for an increase in instruction cost.

#### SEC1 Encoding of Public Key

The proposal specifies the public key to be SEC1 encoded. This encoding is
65-bytes, containing the point coordinates uncompressed, and is the same
encoding used by the existing `recover_key_ecdsa_secp256k1` function.

Most applications using secp256r1 are likely to produce a 72-byte ASN.1 DER encoded public key, which is convertible.

#### Compact Encoding of Signature

The proposal specifies the signature to be encoded as two 32-bit big endian
integers. This encoding is 64-bytes and is the same encoding used by the
existing `recover_key_ecdsa_secp256k1` function.

Most applications using secp256r1 are likely to produce a 70 to 73-byte ASN.1 DER encoded signature, which is convertible.

#### Webauthn / Passkeys

The secp256r1 verify interface is largely motivated by the webauthn use case. Webauthn involves an application registering with a client, that produces a private key, and provides the public key back to the application. The application can then engage the client to sign data that the application can verify using the public key shared earlier.

The client may be a browser, phone, secret manager, or other software.

The application could be a dapp, application, browser extension, or any other
software.

The public key could be an EdDSA (ed25519), ES256 (ECDSA secp256r1), PS256, or RS256, where the last two are both RSA signing algorithms.

In all signing algorithms the payload to sign is produced by concatenating the
webauthn authenticator data, and a SHA-256 hash of the client data JSON. The
client data JSON contains several fields, one being the `challenge` field, that
an application requesting a signature can set. The challenge provided by an
application is base64 url encoded in the `challenge` field of the client data
JSON.

For example, a client data JSON:
```json
{
  "type":"webauthn.get",
  "challenge":"hJHFvaaoU7qkcH9kML46shLL_btpYGCA6ty3ie0M1Qw",
  "origin":"http://localhost:4507",
  "crossOrigin":false
}
```

For Stellar transactions intended to be authenticated by a webauthn
signature in a Soroban custom account, this challenge can be the SHA-256 hash of
the `HashIDPreimage` `ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION`.

In the ed25519 algorithm the payload as-is is passed to the signature verification function.

In the ECDSA secp256r1 algorithm the payload is hashed using SHA-256, and the hash is passed to the verification function.

It could be argued that adding secp256r1 signature verification is insufficient
to implement webauthn signature verification in a contract because verification
also requires JSON and base64 url support, neither of which are supported by the
Soroban host functions.

There are some aspects of Webauthn that are discussed below by the proposal.
Even though the concerns are not critical concerns of the proposal of secp256r1
alone, the proposals is primarily motivated by Webauthn, and the concerns below
establish whether this proposal alone would be sufficient to establish a
Webauthn contract on Soroban.

##### Base64 URL Encoding

It is possible to embed a small and efficient fixed width base64 url encoder
into a contract. Therefore the lack of native base64 URL encoding in the Soroban
environmen host interface is not a limiting factor. See
[leighmcculloch/soroban-base64].

##### JSON

It is possible to embed the `serde-json-core` crate for decoding a message.
There are some limitations depending if the alloc feature of the `soroban-sdk`
is used or not. The limitations are not prohibitive. See
[leighmcculloch/soroban-json].

Also, it is reasonable to take the position that the limited verification of
client data JSON, which is discussed at length in the specification, means that
a fully fledged JSON parser is not required.

The specification says Relying Parties (RP) should handle key reordering and new
values being introduced. But the specification also goes to great length to
detail how the client data json is a subset of JSON, and a limited resource
parser can be written so as to verify the client data JSON.

Therefore, multilpe options exists appealing to different risk and costs
appetites.

##### Challenge Suitability

**The statements in this section must be verified.**

The [Webauthn] specification requires that the challenge be randomized to avoid
replay. The contract is the Relying Party (RP) in the authentication ceremony.
Therefore the RP is supposed to select a randomly generated challenge value.
However, as a contract existing on chain, this is not possible. Instead it can
be stated that the challenge will be random preventing replay because the RP by
requires that the challenge be a hash of the Soroban Authorization, and best
practice requires that any authenticating client select a random nonce for the
Soroban Authorization.

##### Signature Counters Utility

**The statements in this section must be verified.**

The [Webauthn] specification allows an authenticator to keep track of a
signature counter and to communicate that counter to the RP via the
authenticator data that is part of data that is signed.

Relying Parties (RP) are encouraged to use the signature counter as signal to
whether the authenticator has been inappropriately cloned. An RP would identify
that there exists a cloned authenticator by seeing the counter go backwards.

It's worth noting that an RP wouldn't be able to identify which authenticator
was the cloned authenticator, and only that one existed.

If a contract detected this scenario it wouldn't be able to take any independent
action such as locking the account, as it would have no way to identify which
authenticator was cloned. A contract might have a backup credential that could
be used to unlock it in this situation, but that is out-of-scope of this
proposal.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

This proposal is completely backwards compatible.

### Resource Utilization

#### Metering

An ECDSA secp256r1 verification takes approximately 2ms in current tests. It
must be appropriately metered.

#### Storage

The use of a verify interface rather than a recovery interface requires that the 65-byte public key be stored or transmitted into the host for verification. It could be reasonable to present, or later add, a recovery interface that could more efficiently work with a truncated hash of the public key. See the Design Rationale section for more details.

## Security

### Prehash

The `msg_digest` parameter must be a prehash produced by a secure cryptographic
hash function per the ECDSA specification. The non-specification of the hashing
function by the host function could be a weakness if developers use the
flexibility to build logic that produce signatures not using such a hash
function, but to require the use of a specific hash function would be
unreasonable as it would be unnecessarily restrictive and would require
transmission of the entire message that may not be desirable for a number of
reasons, such as resource cost or privacy.

### Audited Implementations

The only ECDSA secp256r1 pure-Rust crates that the Soroban environment could
embed are the [p256] and [ecdsa] crates. At the date that this proposal has been
written both crates have a warning in their readme indicating that they have
never been independently audited.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet. But will be tracked by [stellar/rs-sorovan-env#807] if implemented.

[Webauthn]: https://www.w3.org/TR/webauthn-2/
[p256]: https://crates.io/crates/p256
[ecdsa]: https://crates.io/crates/ecdsa
[stellar/rs-soroban-env#807]: https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/issues/807
[leighmcculloch/soroban-base64]: https://github.com/leighmcculloch/soroban-base64
[leighmcculloch/soroban-json]: https://github.com/leighmcculloch/soroban-json
