## Preamble

```
CAP: 0027
Title: First-class multiplexed accounts
Author: David Mazières and Tomer Weller
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-12-05
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/forum/#!topic/stellar-dev/LIFvbMi9jPo
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

A new type of Account ID includes a 64-bit memo ID.  This memo ID has
no effect on the semantics of operations or their authorization, but
it facilitates multiplexing a single account across multiple users.

## Motivation

A common pattern in the Stellar ecosystem is for services to share a
single Stellar account ID across many users, relying on the memo ID to
disambiguate incoming payments.

Experience shows that people frequently forget to include the memo ID,
resulting in either lost funds or onerous support calls.  Moreover,
memo IDs are per transaction, not per occurrence of an account ID,
which imposes restrictions on the use of multiplexed accounts.  For
example, it is not possible to include multiple payments to different
multiplexed accounts in the same transaction.  Similarly, it is not
possible to refund payments from a multiplexed account ID, as the
transaction's memo ID by convention describes only the destination,
not the source of funds.

By adding an optional memo ID to the account ID type, we make
multiplexed accounts a first-class abstraction that can be used
anywhere a normal account ID can be used.

### Goals Alignment

First-class multiplexed accounts help scalability by eliminating an
incentive for users to create many accounts when virtual accounts
would suffice.  They also significantly improve usability by
addressing the pain point of support costs for users who forget memo
IDs.

## Abstract

A new type, `MuxedAccount`, replaces `AccountID` in many places.  A
`MuxedAccount` can contain either a plain Ed25519 public key, or a
public key and a 64-bit subaccount ID.  The subaccount ID has no
effect on the semantics of transactions, but can be used by
higher-layer software to multiplex a single stellar account among
multiple users.

## Specification

The multiplexed account type is represented by a new XDR union:

~~~ {.c}
enum CryptoKeyType
{
    KEY_TYPE_ED25519 = 0,
    KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519 = 256,  // This is new
    KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX = 1,
    KEY_TYPE_HASH_X = 2
};

// Source or destination of a payment operation
union MuxedAccount switch (CryptoKeyType type) {
 case KEY_TYPE_ED25519:
     uint256 ed25519;
 case KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519:
     struct {
         uint64 id;
         uint256 ed25519;
     } med25519;
};
~~~

The following fields, which were previously an `AccountID` or
`AccountID*`, are now a `MuxedAccount` or `MuxedAccount*`
(respectively):

* `PaymentOp::destination`
* `PathPaymentStrictReceiveOp::destination`
* `PathPaymentStrictSendOp::destination`
* `Operation::sourceAccount`
* `Operation::destination` (for `ACCOUNT_MERGE`)
* `Transaction::sourceAccount`
* `SimplePaymentResult::destination`

Note, however, that this must not be implemented before CAP-0015 or
CAP-0019 (which updates the transaction format), as these other CAPs
depend on all existing transactions starting with 4 zero bytes (which
will no longer be the case when the transaction's `sourceAccount` is a
`MuxedAccount`).

### Strkey update

Multiplexed accounts need a new ASCII format representation, so we
must extend strkey, the existing encoding.  Strkey previously covered
ED25519 public keys, ED25519 private keys (also known as seeds),
pre-authorized transaction hashes, and hash-x signers (which provide
signing authority upon revelation of a SHA-256 preimage). We make two
changes:  First, we add a new type of strkey for multiplexed account
IDs, represented by a new value in the top 5 bits of the version byte,
which is the 8 bits of the key.  The possible "base" values (top 5
bits) of the version byte, which determine the first character of the
base-32 encoding of the key, are listed here:

| Key type                | Base value   | First char | Muxed | Alg  |
| ----------------------- | ------------ | ---------- | ----- | ---- |
| STRKEY\_PUBKEY          | 6 << 3       | G          | no    | PK   |
| STRKEY\_MUXED           | 12 << 3      | M          | yes   | PK   |
| STRKEY\_PRIVKEY         | 18 << 3      | S          | no    | PK   |
| STRKEY\_PRE\_AUTH\_TX   | 19 << 3      | T          | no    | Hash |
| STRKEY\_HASH\_X         | 23 << 3      | X          | no    | Hash |

Second, instead requiring the low 3 bits of the version byte to be
zero, we now use them as an algorithm specifier.  Thus, a version byte
becomes the bitwise OR of a base value above and one of the algorithm
specifiers from the two tables below.  (These tables will be extended
when Stellar adds additional crypto algorithms.)

| PK Algorithm                | Value |
| --------------------------- | ----- |
| STRKEY\_ALG\_ED25519        | 0     |


| Hash Algorithm              | Value |
| --------------------------- | ----- |
| STRKEY\_ALG\_SHA256         | 0     |

The following steps transform a binary key into a strkey:

1.  Start with the appropriate version byte computed by the OR of a
    key type base value and algorithm selector from the tables above.

2.  If we are encoding a multiplexed address, append an 8-byte memo ID
    in network byte order (most significant byte first).

3.  Append the binary bytes of the key (e.g., 32-bytes for ED25519).

4.  Compute a 16-bit CRC16 checksum of the combined version byte,
    optional memo ID, and binary key (using polynomial
    x<sup>16</sup> + x<sup>12</sup> + x<sup>5</sup> + 1). Append the
    two-byte checksum to the result of the previous step (e.g.,
    producing a 35-byte quantity for a non-multiplexed ED25519 public
    key, or 43 byte quantity for a multiplexed one).

3.  Encode the result of the previous step using [RFC4648 base-32
    encoding](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4648#section-6) without
    padding.  For example, a multiplexed address yields a 43-byte
    quantity whose base-32 encoding is 69 bytes with no trailing `=`
    signs because no padding is allowed.

To transform a strkey into a binary key, the process is simply
reversed.  However, a strkey is only valid if re-encoding the binary
key yields the exact same strkey.  Note, in particular, that a
strkey's length **must not** be congruent to 1, 3, or 6 mod 8, and
unused bits of the last symbol must be zero.  Some non-padding base32
libraries, such as the one in the standard go
library&mdash;`base32.StdEncoding.WithPadding(base32.NoPadding)`&mdash;do
not enforce these requirements.  Therefore, implementations of strkey
decoding **must** check and reject such invalid inputs, or perform a
round-trip and reject strkey inputs that do not re-encode to the exact
same string.

## Design Rationale

An ecosystem-only proposal (SEP-0023) was proposed, but had too many
limitations, including the inability to send payments to several
virtual accounts, the inability to specify virtual accounts as a
source, and increased cognitive load for developers.  The CAP approach
seems much cleaner, with very little added complexity in the server.

The particular set of fields promoted to `MuxedAccount` were chosen to
avoid any changes to the database.  Hence, assets and offers are still
associated with an `AccountID` rather than a `MuxedAccount`.

As for the strkey update, there were 3 unused bits at the bottom of
each version byte that do not affect the first character, so we
decided to reserve these to facilitate future crypto agility.  A
different letter was chosen for multiplexed accounts because these are
not completely interchangable with traditional `AccountID` values.
(For instance, a multiplexed account cannot issue assets, only the
base account can do so.)

## Backwards Incompatibilities

All existing transactions will continue to be valid, but transactions
with a `MuxedAccount` will not be parsable by old software.  Hence,
the best time to roll out this change will be at the same time as
CAP-0015.  Software that converts new-style transactions to old can
also strip out the identifiers from `MuxedAccount` structures.

## Security Concerns

Certain addresses that are identical may not look identical.  This
could confuse client software.  For instance, sending an asset to a
multiplexed account tied to the issuer will destroy the asset.

People commonly assume that base-32 decoding libraries will reject
inputs with invalid lengths or invalid trailing bits, but this is
often not the case, particularly when padding is disabled.  If
implementations forget to check this, they will parse invalid strkeys.
This could lead to problems, particularly if strkeys are used as
indexes in a hash table, where an attacker could create multiple
entries for the same account.

## Strkey test Cases

Implementations of strkey must accept the following valid test cases
and reject the invalid test cases.  Common bugs such as forgetting to
reject strkeys with length congruent to 1, 3, or 6 mod 8 before
invoking base-32 decoding will cause software to accept the invalid
test cases, which could in turn cause security problems.

### Valid test cases

1. Valid non-multiplexed account

    - Strkey `GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVSGZ`
    - type: `KEY_TYPE_ED25519`
    - Binary `MuxedAccount`:
    ~~~ {.c}
    {
        0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x3f, 0x0c, 0x34, 0xbf,
        0x93, 0xad, 0x0d, 0x99, 0x71, 0xd0, 0x4c, 0xcc,
        0x90, 0xf7, 0x05, 0x51, 0x1c, 0x83, 0x8a, 0xad,
        0x97, 0x34, 0xa4, 0xa2, 0xfb, 0x0d, 0x7a, 0x03,
        0xfc, 0x7f, 0xe8, 0x9a,
    }
    ~~~

1. Valid multiplexed account

    - Strkey: `MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL6`
    - type: `KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519`
    - id: 0
    - ed25519: `GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVSGZ`
    - Binary `MuxedAccount`:
    ~~~ {.c}
     {
         0x00, 0x00, 0x01, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00,
         0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x3f, 0x0c, 0x34, 0xbf,
         0x93, 0xad, 0x0d, 0x99, 0x71, 0xd0, 0x4c, 0xcc,
         0x90, 0xf7, 0x05, 0x51, 0x1c, 0x83, 0x8a, 0xad,
         0x97, 0x34, 0xa4, 0xa2, 0xfb, 0x0d, 0x7a, 0x03,
         0xfc, 0x7f, 0xe8, 0x9a,
     }
    ~~~

1. Valid multiplexed account in which unsigned id exceeds maximum
   signed 64-bit integer

    - Strkey: `MCAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITKNOG`
    - type: `KEY_TYPE_MUXED_ED25519`
    - id: 9223372036854775808
    - ed25519: `GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVSGZ`
    - Binary `MuxedAccount`:
    ~~~ {.c}
    {
        0x00, 0x00, 0x01, 0x00, 0x80, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00,
        0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x00, 0x3f, 0x0c, 0x34, 0xbf,
        0x93, 0xad, 0x0d, 0x99, 0x71, 0xd0, 0x4c, 0xcc,
        0x90, 0xf7, 0x05, 0x51, 0x1c, 0x83, 0x8a, 0xad,
        0x97, 0x34, 0xa4, 0xa2, 0xfb, 0x0d, 0x7a, 0x03,
        0xfc, 0x7f, 0xe8, 0x9a,
     }
     ~~~

### Invalid test cases

1. Invalid length (Ed25519 should be 32 bytes, not 5)

    - Strkey: `GAAAAAAAACGC6`

1. The unused trailing bit must be zero in the encoding of the last
   three bytes (24 bits) as five base-32 symbols (25 bits)
    - Strkey: `MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL7`

1. Invalid length (congruent to 1 mod 8)
    - Strkey: `GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVSGZA`

1. Invalid length (base-32 decoding should yield 35 bytes, not 36)
    - Strkey: `GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJUACUSI`

1. Invalid algorithm (low 3 bits of version byte are 7)
    - Strkey: `G47QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVP2I`

1. Invalid length (congruent to 6 mod 8)
    - Strkey: `MCAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITKNOGA`

1. Invalid length (base-32 decoding should yield 43 bytes, not 44)
    - Strkey: `MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITIADJPA`

1. Invalid algorithm (low 3 bits of version byte are 7)
    - Strkey: `M4AAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITIU2K`

1. Padding bytes are not allowed
    - Strkey: `MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL6===`

1. Invalid checksum
    - Strkey:
      `MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL4`

You can paste these invalid strkeys more conveniently into a unit test
using the following array:

~~~ {.c}
{
    "GAAAAAAAACGC6",
    "MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL7",
    "GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVSGZA",
    "GA7QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJUACUSI",
    "G47QYNF7SOWQ3GLR2BGMZEHXAVIRZA4KVWLTJJFC7MGXUA74P7UJVP2I",
    "MCAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITKNOGA",
    "MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITIADJPA",
    "M4AAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITIU2K",
    "MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL6===",
    "MAAAAAAAAAAAAAB7BQ2L7E5NBWMXDUCMZSIPOBKRDSBYVLMXGSSKF6YNPIB7Y77ITLVL4",
}
~~~

## Implementation

An implementation can be fetched to `FETCH_HEAD` with the following
command:

```
git fetch git@github.com:xdrpp/stellar-core dm/muxacct
```

The github web page associated with that branch is here:
<https://github.com/xdrpp/stellar-core/tree/dm/muxacct>
