## Preamble

```
CAP: 0046-11
Title: Soroban Authorization Framework
Working Group:
    Owner: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>
    Authors: Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>
Status: Final
Created: 2023-07-28
Discussion:
Protocol version: 20
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal describes the authorization framework built into the smart contract
runtime environment.

## Motivation
See the Soroban overview CAP for overall Soroban motivation.

Any smart contract that directly produces side effects (ledger modification and
events) requires some sort of authentication and authorization procedure.
Without it, any party could produce any side effects, making the contract 
pointless. 

A lot of the authorization tasks are common for almost every contract:
authentication, context verification, and signature replay protection are very
likely to be implemented in the same fashion. A common solution for these tasks
would be beneficial for the contract developers.

On the other hand, bespoke authorization protocols require bespoke client 
support, which makes it hard to present the information about what exactly is
being authorized to the user. 

Both of the above points serve as motivation for providing the authorization
framework that is built into the core protocol and is not just defined by SEP.
Built-in authorization framework has the following benefits:

- Safety guarantees that are hard (or impossible) to achieve on the contract 
side (for example, advanced context tracking between cross-contract calls)
- Built-in contracts and authorized host functions can use exactly the same
authorization standard as any other contract
- Common procedures can be abstracted away and thus lower risk of contract
developers missing an important authorization piece
- Clients can rely on a single authorization standard that most of the contracts
use
- Better performance thanks to using the native code and thus lower fees

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

  - The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects
    to create highly usable products

## Abstract

This CAP introduces the Soroban Authorization Framework. It consists of an
authorization host module that performs common authorization tasks, custom
account standard and specification, and transaction-level support for 
authorization entries.

## Specification

### XDR

See the XDR diffs in the Soroban overview CAP, specifically those referring to
the `SorobanAuthorizationEntry`.

### Terminology

This CAP uses several terms specific to the Soroban authorization framework.

#### Address

This is a universal built-in identifier in Soroban. In XDR addresses are 
represented by `SCAddress` XDR that has two variants:

- `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` for the Stellar account identifier (`AccountID`).
- `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT` for the 32-byte smart contract identifer

#### Account

Account in the context of Soroban Authorization is any address that performs
authorization (not to confuse with the classic Stellar `AccountID`). For example, 
in case if payment is performed from address A to address B, address A needs to
authorize the payment. Thus we can say 'account A authorizes the payment to
address B'.

#### Custom account

Accounts identified with the contract identifier (i.e. with
`SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT` address) are referred to as 'custom accounts'. As
opposed to the classic Stellar accounts, implementation of the custom accounts
is provided by the arbitrary smart contract logic.

### Components

On a high level, the authorization framework comprises the following components:

- Transaction-level definitions of authorization entries. These allow users to
provide authorization for arbitrary trees of the contract calls on behalf of 
arbitrary accounts using the standardized data structure.
- Host functions that allow contracts to interact with host's authorization
module.
- Authorization module of Soroban host. It consumes the transaction-level 
authorization data, performs authentication, provides replay protection, and
enforces the authorization context.

In the following sections each of the components is described in detail.

### Authorization Payload in Transaction

`InvokeHostFunctionOp` contains an arbitrarily sized array of 
`SorobanAuthorizationEntry` alongside the host function.

Every `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` contains a single tree of contract calls
represented by `SorobanAuthorizedInvocation` XDR and `SorobanCredentials` that
contain the necessary information for the account to authorize the tree.

`SorobanAuthorizedInvocation` only contains the contract calls that require
authorization. More details on how this tree is matched to the actual contract
calls are provided in the [following section](#authorization-algorithm-for-accounts).
Every node in `SorobanAuthorizedInvocation` tree contains an authorized function
specification and an arbitrary number `subInvocations` that specify the 
authorized call trees spawned from the `function`.

`SorobanAuthorizedFunction` allows authorizing the contract invocations with
`SOROBAN_AUTHORIZED_FUNCTION_TYPE_CONTRACT_FN` and contract creation operations
with `SOROBAN_AUTHORIZED_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT_HOST_FN`. Specification
for both is defined by the respective XDR structures used in 
`InvokeHostFunctionOp`: `InvokeContractArgs` for the contract invocation and
`CreateContractArgs` for the contract creation.

`SorobanCredentials` are a union with 2 supported values: 
`SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT` with no additional payload and 
`SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` with `SorobanAddressCredentials` payload.

`SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT` identifies that the transaction source 
account authorizes the corresponding call tree. Since Soroban authorization data
is signed by the source account as a part of the transaction, the source account
can authorize all `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT` entries at once without
any additional signatures or replay protection.

`SorobanAddressCredentials` includes the account address, nonce, signature
expiration ledger and the signature itself. Signature is only considered valid
until the signature expiration ledger (inclusive). Nonce is an arbitrary `int64`
number used for replay prevention. Nonce can't be reused until the signature
expires. More details about the credentials [authentication](#authentication)
and [nonce consumption](#nonce-consumption) are provided in the following
sections.

#### Authorization Payload is Standalone

The specification described above is not associated with transaction in any way.
This allows decoupling transaction source from the Soroban operation actors, so
that they can only sign the Soroban authorization payload. The only exception
are entries with `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT` that infer the authorizer
credentials from the transaction source account (the entry itself doesn't have
any explicit identifiers connecting it to the transaction though).

This puts a restriction on the authorization enforcement mechanism: the entries
have to only be used (i.e. consume nonces) when they are actually being used.
This way frontrunning someone else's authorization entry becomes a no-op, unless
exactly the same operation is performed, which is similar to just submitting a
signed transaction for someone.

#### Soroban Authorization Signature Payload

The authentication of `SorobanAddressCredentials` is performed by verifying the 
signature (or signatures) of a SHA-256 hash of a protocol-defined payload in an
account-specific way. The common payload is defined as
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_SOROBAN_AUTHORIZATION` variant of `HashIDPreimage`. The 
`sorobanAuthorization` envelope has to be filled with information corresponding
to the respective `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` and `networkID`. `networkID` is a
SHA-256 hash of the of the network name. `nonce` and `signatureExpirationLedger`
fields have to match the respective fields in `SorobanAddressCredentials`. 
`invocation` field has to match `rootInvocation` of the `SorobanAuthorizationEntry`.

### Authorization Host Functions

There are two similar host functions for smart contracts to use in order to 
require authorization from an address:

- `require_auth_for_args(address: AddressObject, args: VecObject)` - require
address to have authorized call of the current contract function with provided
arguments.
- `require_auth(address: AddressObject)` - require address to have authorized 
call of the current contract function with all the arguments it has been called
with.

`require_auth` and `require_auth_for_args` have equivalent functionality with
the only difference being the automatic argument inference for `require_auth`.
Going forward we refer to both as `require_auth`.

'Requiring authorization' means that a respective entry 
`SorobanAuthorizedFunction` has to be present in an authenticated 
`SorobanAuthorizationEntry` corresponding to the `address`. Contract address 
and function name are inferred automatically from the current contract's address 
and the _entry point_ contract function, i.e. the function that has been invoked
through the host. Internal function calls that are done with Wasm are not 
considered for the authorization purposes.

Another authorization-related host function is 
`authorize_as_curr_contract(auth_entries: VecObject)`. This function authorizes
the subcontract calls made on behalf of the current contract from the next (and 
only next) contract call that current contract performs. More specifically, if
the current contract A calls function `f` of the contract `B`, then 
`authorize_as_curr_contract` allows A to specify authorizations on calls that
`B.f` performs. Any authorization `B.f` itself performs on behalf of `A` is
implicitly successful (more details in the [following section](#authorization-algorithm-for-invoker-contracts)).
This function expects a vector of `InvokerContractAuthEntry` Soroban contract
types defined as follows:

```rust
#[contracttype]
pub enum InvokerContractAuthEntry {
    Contract(SubContractInvocation),
    CreateContractHostFn(CreateContractHostFnContext),
}
#[contracttype]
pub struct SubContractInvocation {
    pub context: ContractAuthorizationContext,
    pub sub_invocations: Vec<InvokerContractAuthEntry>,
}
#[contracttype]
pub struct ContractAuthorizationContext {
    pub contract: Address,
    pub fn_name: Symbol,
    pub args: Vec<Val>,
}
#[contracttype]
pub struct CreateContractHostFnContext {
    pub executable: ContractExecutable,
    pub salt: BytesN<32>,
}
```

`InvokerContractAuthEntry` has the same semantics as `SorobanAuthorizedFunction`
XDR, but expressed with contract types.

### Soroban Host Authorization Module

All the authorization logic is implemented in the Soroban host and we refer to 
it as 'authorization module' in this CAP.

Soroban host is initialized with all the `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` 
entries from the input `InvokeHostFunctionOp` operation. These entries are
validated structurally (i.e. host ensures that XDR is valid and that function 
arguments are valid host values), but not semantically, i.e. no 
authorization-related validations happen at this point.

There are two distinct authorization scenarios: authorization for the accounts
via `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` transaction payload and authorization of invoker
contracts. Invoker contract authorization is attempted before proceeding to more
general account authorization flow. However, we start with specifying the account
authorization algorithm, as the invoker contract authorization is very similar
and builds on top of that algorithm.

#### Authorization Algorithm for Accounts

Whenever a contract calls `require_auth` for an account, host iterates over every
non-exhausted `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` where credentials match the
account's address. The address is just compared to `SorobanAddressCredentials`
and transaction source account is used for comparison of
`SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT`. Matching happens in exactly the same order
as specified in transaction.

`create_contract` host function pushes a special stack frame identifying that
'create contract' host function is running and implicitly calls a special
 implementation of `require_auth(deployer)` with the arguments being 
`CreateContractArgs` inferred from the `create_contract` arguments. The same
procedure is also applied to the `InvokeHostFunctionOp` operations with
`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT` host function variant.

For every entry with the matching address host proceeds to matching current 
authorized invocation in `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` to the current 
`require_auth` request. The matching algorithm is as follows (the details of 
sub-operations are specified in the sub-sections):

- In case if entry hasn't been matched yet, try matching the root 
`SorobanAuthorizedFunction` of the entry to the current invocation. If the entry
matches, perform authentication and consume nonce. Trap contract in case of
authentication failure or incorrect nonce. Mark the root node as currently 
matched node and take a note of the host invocation frame where the root node was
matched.
    - This case is not executed when there is at least one non-exhausted
    `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` with a currently matched node.
- In case if entry has a currently matched node in the invocation tree, try
matching every `SorobanAuthorizedFunction` in its `subInvocations`. In case of
a match, mark the first match in iteration order as currently matched node.
- Every time host pops an invocation stack frame, mark all the 
`SorobanAuthorizationEntry` entries that have a root node matched within that
frame as exhausted.

##### `SorobanAuthorizedFunction` matching

The `SOROBAN_AUTHORIZED_FUNCTION_TYPE_CONTRACT_FN` variant is considered 
succesfully matched when all of the following is true:

- `contractAddress` equals to the address of the currently running contract
- `functionName` equals to the name of the entry point function of the currently
running contract
- `args` are equal to arguments of the currently entry point contract function
(in case of `require_auth`) or `args` passed to `require_auth_for_args`.

All the equality comparisons must be equivalent to comparing the binary
representation of XDR of every one of these fields.

`SOROBAN_AUTHORIZED_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT_HOST_FN` variant is considered
succesfully matched when `CreateContractArgs` are equal between the 
authorization entry and the contract creation operation.

In case of `HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT` operation two 
`CreateContractArgs` XDR structs are directly compared. 

In case of `create_contract` host function `CreateContractArgs` are built as 
follows:
- `contractIDPreimage` is set to `CONTRACT_ID_PREIMAGE_FROM_ADDRESS` variant,
where `address` is the `deployer` passed to the host function and `salt` is
`salt` value passed to the host function.
- `executable` is set to `CONTRACT_EXECUTABLE_WASM` variant, where `hash` value
is `wasm_hash` value passed to the host function.

##### Authentication

There are 3 different supported approaches to authentication, depending on 
`credentials` in `SorobanAuthorizationEntry`:

- For `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT` authentication is automatically
considered successful, as host trusts the Core to authenticate the transaction
source account.
- For `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` with `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` address
authenticate operation using the standard Stellar account authentication 
procedure. Medium signature threshold has to be reached. Account sequence number
is not increased as Soroban nonce is used for replay prevention.
- For `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_ADDRESS` with `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT` address
authentication is delegated to the custom account contract with the corresponding
address using the reserved `__check_auth` function. If `check_auth` traps or
returns an error, the authentication is considered failed.

###### Stellar Account Authentication

In case of `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_ACCOUNT` address credentials the value of the
`signature` `SCVal` is supposed to be the `SCVal::Vec` of the following contract
type structures:

```rust
#[contracttype]
pub struct AccountEd25519Signature {
    pub public_key: BytesN<32>,
    pub signature: BytesN<64>,
}
```

The vector has to be sorted in increasing order of public keys and contain no
duplicate public keys. Every public key has to be a valid signer of the Stellar
account being authenticated and every signature has to be a valid signature of
SHA-256 of the expected [signature payload](#soroban-authorization-signature-payload)
specified above. The total weight of the signatures has to be equal to or 
greater than the medium threshold of the Stellar account. The maximum allowed
amount of signatures is 20 (consistently with the maximum number of transaction
signers).

###### Custom Account Authentication

In case of `SC_ADDRESS_TYPE_CONTRACT` address credentials the value of the 
`signature` `SCVal` is arbitrary value that a custom account contract can 
interpret.

Any contract that implements the special reserved `__check_auth` function is
treated as a custom account for the purpose of authorization.

The signature of the `__check_auth` function must be defined as follows:

```rust
fn __check_auth(
    signature_payload: BytesN<32>,
    signature: Val,
    auth_contexts: Vec<Context>,
) -> Result<(), Error>;
```

If `__check_auth` doesn't return `()` (i.e. returns error or traps), 
authentication is considered failed.

`Context` provides information about the context in which `require_auth` has
been called and is defined as follows:

```rust
#[contracttype]
pub enum Context {
    Contract(ContractContext),
    CreateContractHostFn(CreateContractHostFnContext),
}
#[contracttype]
pub struct ContractContext {
    pub contract: Address,
    pub fn_name: Symbol,
    pub args: Vec<Val>,
}
#[contracttype]
pub struct CreateContractHostFnContext {
    pub executable: ContractExecutable,
    pub salt: BytesN<32>,
}
#[contracttype]
pub enum ContractExecutable {
    Wasm(BytesN<32>),
}
```

Note, that the `ContractContext` and `ContractAuthorizationContext` structure
definitions are exactly the same as the structures defined for
`authorize_as_curr_contract` function.

`auth_contexts` vector is produced via pre-order depth-first search of the 
`rootInvocation` in `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` that is being authenticated. The
`subInvocations` are iterated in the same order as specified in authorization
entry. For example, if an entry has the following invocation tree structure:
`A->[B->[D, E], C->[F->[G]]` (where every letter corresponds to 
`SorobanAuthorizedFunction` and `subInvocations` are listed inside `[]`), then
the `auth_contexts` will contain functions in the following order: `A,B,D,E,C,F,G`.

`Context` directly corresponds to the `SorobanAuthorizedFunction`.

`SOROBAN_AUTHORIZED_FUNCTION_TYPE_CONTRACT_FN` is converted to `Context::Contract`.
`InvokeContractArgs` are directly converted to `ContractContext`: 
`contractAddress` is written to the `contract` field, `functionName` to `fn_name`,
and `args` vector of `SCVal` to `args` vector of `Val`.

`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT` is converted to `Context::CreateContractHostFn`.
`CreateContractArgs` are converted to `CreateContractHostFnContext` with omission
of some implied fields (such as deployer address from `CONTRACT_ID_PREIMAGE_FROM_ADDRESS`,
that matches the address of the account performing authentication due to the
matching algorithm). `CreateContractArgs` executable is written to 
`CreateContractHostFnContext` executable. Token executable 
causes authentication to fail (as built-in token contract creation doesn't need
authorization). `contractIDPreimage.fromAddress.salt` is written to the `salt`
field of the struct. Entries with `CONTRACT_ID_PREIMAGE_FROM_ASSET` 
`contractIDPreimage` are not allowed and will cause authentication to fail.

###### Self-reentrancy for Custom Accounts

The custom account authentication is the only case of contract invocation with
self-reentrancy allowed. More specifically, the contract with address A can call 
`require_auth(A)`, which would result in calling `A.__check_auth` via the host
invocation. Only self-reentrancy is allowed, i.e. re-entering any other contract
than A in the example is not still not allowed.

##### Signature Expiration Verification

Before trying to consume the nonce, host makes sure that the signature
expiration ledger is valid. 

- If the signature `expirationLedger` value is
strictly less than the current ledger sequence number, then the signature is
considered expired and authorization fails.
- If the signature `expirationLedger` value is strictly greater than maximum 
allowed expiration ledger, signature is considered to be too early and 
authorization fails. Maximum allowed expiration ledger is determined by the
network configuration and computed as
`currentLedgerSequence + stateArchivalSettings.maxEntryTTL - 1`, where
`stateArchivalSettings` is the value from `CONFIG_SETTING_STATE_ARCHIVAL`
`ConfigSettingEntry`.

##### Nonce Consumption

Nonce is consumed only for the authorization entries that have the root 
invocation matched to an actual call, have passed authentication and don't have
an expired signature. As mentioned in the authorization algorithm specification,
nonce is not consumed (and not provided) for `SOROBAN_CREDENTIALS_SOURCE_ACCOUNT`
credentials.

Nonces are stored in `CONTRACT_DATA` `LedgerEntry` with a special format. The 
contract data entry for a given nonce value N for address A is built in the 
following fashion:
- `contract` address is set to A (this includes the Stellar account addresses)
- `key` is set to the special `SCV_LEDGER_KEY_NONCE` variant of `SCVal`. 
`nonceKey` payload of the value is set to N. Only authorization module is 
allowed to create contract data entries with this key.
- `durability` is set to `TEMPORARY`
- `body` is set to `DATA_ENTRY` with `data.val` set to `SCV_VOID` `SCVal` and
`data.flags` are `0`.
- `liveUntilLedgerSeq` is set to the `signatureExpirationLedger` from the
credentials.

Before trying to consume the nonce host checks if it already exists in the 
ledger. If it does, then the signature is potentially replayed and thus the
authentication check fails.

If nonce doesn't exist in the ledger yet, host creates the entry as per 
speicifcation and writes it to the ledger.

Due to the signature expiration verification procedure the nonce entry is
guaranteed to stay in the ledger until the signature expires. After the nonce
entry (and thus the signature) expires, nonce value can be reused for in the new
`SorobanAddressCredentials` entry for the account with a new expiration ledger.

##### Important Propeties of the Algorithm

The authorization algorithm specified above has the following important
properties:

- There is no requirement for the root invocation of `SorobanAuthorizationEntry`
to match the root invocation of `InvokeHostFunctionOp`. This allows users to
bundle the signed operations in non-atomic fashion via a custom contract without
requiring any additional authorization. Addresses also don't have to be unique
in such scenario.
- Contract invocations that don't call `require_auth` are ignored by the
algorithm, which makes router-type contracts that just pass the
invocation through without doing any writes transparent for the signer.
- It is possible to have multiple authorized trees for the same address with the
root in the same stack frame. In such case the inner nodes can be interchanged 
between trees while still satisfying the algorithm. For example, if
contract A calls `require_auth` twice, then calls B and C both of which call
`require_auth`, the following combinations of `SorobabAuthorizationEntry` 
invocations will pass authorization algorithm: `A->[B, C], A`, `A->B, A->C`,
`A->C, A->B`, `A, A->[B, C]`. Note, that sequencing the calls changes the 
requirements, for example if A calls `require_auth` right before calling B and C,
only the following combinations would pass: `A->B, A->C`, `A->[B, C], A`.
- Authorized call trees can't be broken down into separate 
`SorobanAuthorizationEntry` entries (unless there are multiple valid trees, as
described above). This means that if contract A calls contract B and both require 
authorization, the signature for 'A invokes B' has to be provided. Signatures 
for 'only A' and 'only B' won't be matched by the algorithm. This makes it hard
to create a set of disjoint frontrunnable signatures.

#### Authorization Algorithm for Invoker Contracts

Whenver a contract calls `require_auth` host verifies if the address for which 
authorization is required is the invoker contract, i.e. if its address is an
address of the contract that invoked the current contract. If that's the case,
the call immediately succeeds.

In case if authorized address is not the direct invoker, it still might have
indirectly authorized the call using `authorize_as_curr_contract` host function
specified in the [respective section](#authorization-host-functions). Thus host
executes the same algorithm as the one described in the section above with the 
following differences:

- Instead of `SorobanAuthorizationEntry` entries, operate on 
`InvokerContractAuthEntry` structures.
- Don't perform any additional authentication or replay prevention. Host stores
`InvokerContractAuthEntry` attributed to the currently running contract and 
thus these can be considered authentic in later calls.

All the relevant properties of the account-specific algorithm also apply to
the invoker contract algorithm.

##### Invoker Contracts vs Custom Account Contracts Prioritization

A contract may be an invoker contract and a custom account contract at the same
time. Following the specified algorithms, the priority is always given to the
invoker contract auhtorization. For example, if contract A invokes contract B
and contract B calls `require_auth(A)`, then the call will immediately succeed
because A is invoker of B. Thus if there is a `SorobanAuthorizationEntry`
payload for contract A address with a matching invocation of B contract, it will
stay non-matched and non-exhausted.

## Resource Utilization

As mentioned in the Motivation section, authorization is necessary for most
of the smart contracts, so moving the implementation to the compiled code (as
opposed to Wasm) should on average reduce the resource utilization compared to
the contracts that use Wasm-based authorization approach.

Granular nonces consume more ledger space than autoincrement nonces, however
they are evicted from the ledger after expiration as any other temporary entries.
Thus given short enough signature expirations these shouldn't cause significant
ledger bloat and in the end may be more efficient than persistent autoincrement
entries.

## Security Concerns

Authorization framework built into protocol introduces a single potential common
point of failure for all the contracts that are using it. However, it can can be
evaluated and reviewed much more than an average contract, thus likely 
reducing the vulnerability probability compared to the manual implementation.
Contracts are also not in any way forced to use the authorization framework
beyond the interactions with the built-in token contract.

There are no specific security concerns from the protocol standpoint. As with
any piece of Soroban host, most of the potential issues are isolated to the
scope of the invoked contract.

Built-in token contract uses authorization framework as well, and there is a
potential attack surface for unauthorized access to the trustlines and Stellar 
account balances, but the authorization logic has to be in the host anyway, so
this CAP doesn't significantly change the risks for the built-in token.

## Implementation

[`auth.rs`](https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/blob/d92944576e2301c9866215efcdc4bbd24a5f3981/soroban-env-host/src/auth.rs)
file of Soroban host contains the implementation for the authorization framework.

[`account_contract.rs`](https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/blob/d92944576e2301c9866215efcdc4bbd24a5f3981/soroban-env-host/src/native_contract/account_contract.rs)
file of Soroban host contains the implementation of Stellar account authentication as well as the harness for calling the custom contracts.

## Test Cases

[test/auth.rs](https://github.com/stellar/rs-soroban-env/blob/d92944576e2301c9866215efcdc4bbd24a5f3981/soroban-env-host/src/test/auth.rs) in Soroban host contains the comprehensive tests for various authorization scenarios.
