## Preamble

```
CAP: 0023
Title: Two-Part Payments with PreparedTrustLineEntry and ClaimableBalanceEntry
Author: Jonathan Jove
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-06-04
Updated: 2020-02-05
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/issues/303
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
Payments can fail depending on the state of the destination account. This
proposal introduces new operations that separate sending a payment from
receiving the payment. Then the success of sending depends only on the state of
the sending account and success of receiving depends only on the state of the
receiving account.

## Motivation
This proposal seeks to solve the following problem: it should be easy to send a
payment to an account that is not necessarily prepared to receive the payment.
There are several manifestations of this problem, the two most important being

1. it should be easy for protocols (like an implementation of payment channels)
to pay out to participants, and
2. it should be easy for issuers to issue assets non-interactively.

As a corollary to this problem, it should also be easy to prepare a trust line
for another account. The primary manifestation of this problem is that an
issuer cannot authorize a trust line for an account if that account has not
created the trust line.

### Goals Alignment
This proposal is aligned with several Stellar Network Goals, among them:

- The Stellar Network should facilitate simplicity and interoperability with
  other protocols and networks.
- The Stellar Network should enable cross-border payments, i.e. payments via
  exchange of assets, throughout the globe, enabling users to make payments
  between assets in a manner that is fast, cheap, and highly usable.
    - In support of this, the Stellar Network should enable asset issuance, but
      as a means of enabling cross-border payments.

## Abstract
We introduce `PreparedTrustLineEntry` and `ClaimableBalanceEntry` as new types
of `LedgerEntry` which respectively represent a trust line created for another
account and the transfer of ownership of some amount of an asset. The operation
`CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` allows the creation of a prepared trust line, which
permits temporal separation of preparing a trust line to a certain state and an
account actually accepting that trust line. The operations
`CreateClaimableBalanceOp` and `ClaimClaimableBalanceOp` allow the creation and
consumption of claimable balance entries, which permits temporal separation of
initiating and reciving a payment. Existing proposals, such as those for
deterministic accounts, can provide a similar mechanism but are not able to
handle authorization restricted assets as easily. A specific and simple protocol
that will be facilitated is the asset issuance protocol that issues an asset to
a given account, regardless of whether it exists or is prepared to receive the
funds.

## Specification

### XDR
As a preliminary change, we will clean up the XDR for `AllowTrustOp` to create
a new type `NonNativeAsset` which will be used in what follows.
```c++
union NonNativeAsset switch (AssetType type)
{
// ASSET_TYPE_NATIVE is not allowed
case ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM4:
    AssetCode4 assetCode4;
case ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12:
    AssetCode12 assetCode12;
// add other asset types here in the future
};

struct AllowTrustOp
{
    AccountID trustor;
    NonNativeAsset asset;
    bool authorize;
};
```

First, we introduce `PreparedTrustLineEntry`, `ClaimableBalanceEntry`, and the
corresponding changes for `LedgerEntryType` and `LedgerEntry`.
```c++
enum LedgerEntryType
{
    // ... ACCOUNT, TRUSTLINE, OFFER, unchanged ...
    DATA = 3,
    PREPARED_TRUSTLINE = 4,
    CLAIMABLE_BALANCE = 5
};

struct PreparedTrustLineEntry
{
    // Account this trustline would belong to
    AccountID accountID;

    // Asset that this trustline would hold
    NonNativeAsset asset;

    // See TrustLineFlags
    uint32 flags;

    // Amount of native asset to pay the reserve
    int64 reserve;

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};

enum ClaimPredicateType
{
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_UNCONDITIONAL = 0,
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_AND = 1,
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_OR = 2,
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_ABSOLUTE_TIME = 3,
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_ABSOLUTE_TIME = 4,
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_RELATIVE_TIME = 5,
    CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_RELATIVE_TIME = 6
};

union ClaimPredicate switch (ClaimPredicateType type)
{
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_UNCONDITIONAL:
    void;
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_AND:
    ClaimPredicate andPredicates<2>;
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_OR:
    ClaimPredicate orPredicates<2>;
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_ABSOLUTE_TIME:
    int64 absBefore;
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_ABSOLUTE_TIME:
    int64 absAfter;
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_RELATIVE_TIME:
    int64 relBefore;    // Seconds since closeTime of the ledger in which the
                        // ClaimableBalanceEntry was created
case CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_RELATIVE_TIME:
    int64 relAfter;     // Seconds since closeTime of the ledger in which the
                        // ClaimableBalanceEntry was created
};

enum ClaimantType
{
    CLAIMANT_TYPE_V0 = 0
};

union Claimant switch (ClaimantType type)
{
case CLAIMANT_TYPE_V0:
    struct {
        AccountID destination;    // The account that can use this condition
        ClaimPredicate predicate; // Claimable if predicate is true
    } v0;
};

enum ClaimableBalanceIDType
{
    CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_ID_TYPE_V0 = 0
};

union ClaimableBalanceID switch (ClaimableBalanceIDType type)
{
case CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_ID_TYPE_V0:
    Hash v0;
};

struct ClaimableBalanceEntry
{
    // Unique identifier for this ClaimableBalanceEntry
    ClaimableBalanceID balanceID;

    // Account that created this ClaimableBalanceEntry
    AccountID createdBy;

    // List of claimants with associated predicate
    Claimant claimants<10>;

    // Any asset including native
    Asset asset;

    // Amount of asset
    int64 amount;

    // Amount of native asset to pay the reserve
    int64 reserve;

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};

struct LedgerEntry
{
    uint32 lastModifiedLedgerSeq; // ledger the LedgerEntry was last changed

    union switch (LedgerEntryType type)
    {
    // ... ACCOUNT, TRUSTLINE, OFFER, DATA unchanged ...
    case PREPARED_TRUSTLINE:
        PreparedTrustLineEntry preparedTrustLine;
    case CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
        ClaimableBalanceEntry claimableBalance;
    }
    data;

    // reserved for future use
    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    }
    ext;
};

struct LedgerKey
{
    // ... ACCOUNT, TRUSTLINE, OFFER, DATA unchanged ...
case PREPARED_TRUSTLINE:
    struct
    {
        AccountID accountID;
        NonNativeAsset asset;
    } preparedTrustLine;

case CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
    struct
    {
        ClaimableBalanceID balanceID;
    } claimableBalance;
};
```

Second, we introduce the new operations `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp`,
`CreateClaimableBalanceOp`, and `ClaimClaimableBalanceOp` as well as the
corresponding changes to `OperationType` and `Operation`.
```c++
enum OperationType
{
    // ... CREATE_ACCOUNT, ..., MANAGE_BUY_OFFER unchanged ...
    PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND = 13,
    CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE = 14,
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE = 15,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE = 16
};

struct CreatePreparedTrustLineOp
{
    AccountID accountID;
    Asset asset;
};

struct CreateClaimableBalanceOp
{
    Asset asset;
    int64 amount;
    Claimant claimants<10>;
};

struct ClaimClaimableBalanceOp
{
    Hash balanceID;
};

struct Operation
{
    // sourceAccount is the account used to run the operation
    // if not set, the runtime defaults to "sourceAccount" specified at
    // the transaction level
    AccountID* sourceAccount;

    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    // ... CREATE_ACOUNT, ..., PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND unchanged ...
    case CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE:
        CreatePreparedTrustLineOp createPreparedTrustLineOp;
    case CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
        CreateClaimableBalanceOp createClaimableBalanceOp;
    case CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
        ClaimClaimableBalanceOp claimClaimableBalanceOp;
    }
    body;
};
```

Third, we introduce the result types `CreatePreparedTrustLineResult`,
`CreateClaimableBalanceResult`, and `ClaimClaimableBalanceResult` as well as the
corresponding changes to `OperationResult`.
```c++
enum ChangeTrustResultCode
{
    // ... CHANGE_TRUST_SUCCESS, ..., CHANGE_TRUST_LOW_RESERVE unchanged ...
    CHANGE_TRUST_SELF_NOT_ALLOWED = -5, // trusting self is not allowed
    CHANGE_TRUST_LINE_FULL = -6         // could not receive balance from
                                        // prepared trust line
};

enum CreatePreparedTrustLineResultCode
{
    CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_SUCCESS = 0,
    CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_NO_ISSUER = -1,
    CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_MALFORMED = -2,
    CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_LOW_RESERVE = -3
};

union CreatePreparedTrustLineResult switch (CreatePreparedTrustLineResultCode code)
{
case CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_SUCCESS:
    void;
default:
    void;
};

enum CreateClaimableBalanceResultCode
{
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS = 0,
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_MALFORMED = -1,
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_LOW_RESERVE = -2,
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NO_TRUST = -3,
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_AUTHORIZED = -4,
    CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_UNDERFUNDED = -5
};

union CreateClaimableBalanceResult switch (CreateClaimableBalanceResultCode code)
{
case CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS:
    void;
default:
    void;
};

enum ClaimClaimableBalanceResultCode
{
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS = 0,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_DOES_NOT_EXIST = -1,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_CANNOT_CLAIM = -2,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_LINE_FULL = -3,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_AUTHORIZED = -4
};

union ClaimClaimableBalanceResult switch (ClaimClaimableBalanceResultCode code)
{
case CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS:
    void;
default:
    void;
};

struct OperationResult
{
    // sourceAccount is the account used to run the operation
    // if not set, the runtime defaults to "sourceAccount" specified at
    // the transaction level
    AccountID* sourceAccount;

    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    // ... CREATE_ACOUNT, ..., PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND unchanged ...
    case CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE:
        CreatePreparedTrustLineResult createPreparedTrustLineResult;
    case CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
        CreateClaimableBalanceResult createClaimableBalanceResult;
    case CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
        ClaimClaimableBalanceResult claimClaimableBalanceResult;
    }
    body;
};
```

### Semantics

#### CreatePreparedTrustLineOp
A `PreparedTrustLineEntry` can only be created by the
`CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` operation. `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` is invalid
with `CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_MALFORMED` if

- `sourceAccount = accountID`
- `asset` is invalid
- `accountID` is the issuer of `asset`

The behavior of `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` is as follows:

1. Fail with `CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_NO_ISSUER` if the issuer of `asset` does not
   exist
2. Skip to step 11 if a trust line with the specified `accountID` and `asset` exists
3. Skip to step 8 if a prepared trust line with the specified `accountID` and
   `asset` exists
4. Fail with `CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_LOW_RESERVE` if the `sourceAccount`
   does not have at least `baseReserve` available balance of native asset
   (see CAP-0003)
5. Deduct `baseReserve` of native asset from `sourceAccount`
6. Create a prepared trust line with the following properties:
    - `accountID` as specified
    - `asset` as specified
    - `flags = 0` if the issuer has `AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG` and
      `flags = AUTHORIZED_FLAG` if the issuer does not have `AUTH_REQUIRED_FLAG`
    - `reserve = baseReserve`
7. Skip to step 11
8. Fail with `CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_LOW_RESERVE` if `reserve < baseReserve`
   and the `sourceAccount` does not have at least `baseReserve - reserve`
   available balance of native asset
9. Deduct `max(baseReserve - reserve, 0)` of native asset from `sourceAccount`
10. Update the prepared trust line with `reserve = baseReserve`
11. Succeed with `CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_SUCCESS`

`CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` requires medium threshold because it can be used to
send funds.

#### AllowTrustOp
The behavior of `AllowTrustOp` when used on a trust line is unchanged. The
behavior of `AllowTrustOp` when used on a prepared trust line is analogous to
the behavior when used on a trust line.

#### ChangeTrustOp
The behavior of `ChangeTrustOp` when used on an existing trust line is
unchanged. The behavior of `ChangeTrustOp` when used to create a trust line if a
prepared trust line does not exist is unchanged. The behavior of `ChangeTrustOp`
when used to create a trust line if a prepared trust line does exist is as
follows:

1. Fail with `CHANGE_TRUST_LINE_FULL` if the `sourceAccount` does not have
   `reserve` available limit of native asset (see CAP-0003)
2. Add `reserve` of native asset to the `sourceAccount`
3. Perform `ChangeTrustOp` as usual, except that `flags` is as specified in the
   prepared trust line
4. Delete the `PreparedTrustLineEntry`

#### CreateClaimableBalanceOp
A `ClaimableBalanceEntry` can only be created by the `CreateClaimableBalanceOp`
operation. `CreateClaimableBalanceOp` is invalid with
`CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_MALFORMED` if

- `asset` is invalid
- `amount <= 0`
- `claimants` has length 0
- `claimants[i].destination = claimants[j].destination` (for any `i != j`)
- `claimants[i].predicate` has depth greater than 4 (for any `i`)
- `claimants[i].predicate` contains a predicate of type `CLAIM_PREDICATE_AND`
  with `andPredicates.size() < 2` or `CLAIM_PREDICATE_OR` with
  `orPredicates.size() < 2` (for any `i`)
- `claimants[i].predicate` contains a predicate of type
  `CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_ABSOLUTE_TIME`, `CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_ABSOLUTE_TIME`,
  `CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_RELATIVE_TIME`, or
  `CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_RELATIVE_TIME` with `absBefore < 0`, `absAfter < 0`,
  `relBefore < 0`, or `relAfter < 0` (for any `i`)

The behavior of `CreateClaimableBalanceOp` is as follows:

1. Fail with `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_LOW_RESERVE` if the `sourceAccount` does
   not have at least `claimants.size() * baseReserve` available balance of
   native asset
2. Deduct `claimants.size() * baseReserve` of native asset from
   `sourceAccount`
3. Fail with `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NO_TRUST` if the `sourceAccount` does not
   have a trust line for `asset`
4. Fail with `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_AUTHORIZED` if the `sourceAccount`
   trust line for `asset` does not have `AUTHORIZED_FLAG` set
5. Fail with `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_UNDERFUNDED` if the `sourceAccount` does
   not have at least `amount` available balance of `asset`
6. Deduct `amount` of `asset` from `sourceAccount`
7. Create a claimable balance entry with the following properties:
    - `balanceID` of type `CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_ID_TYPE_V0`. `balanceID.v0()` equal
       to the SHA256 hash of the concatenation of the `sourceAccount` of the
       transaction, the `seqNum` of the transaction, and the index of this
       operation in the transaction
    - `createdBy = sourceAccount`
    - `claimants` as specified, with the exception that
        - `CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_RELATIVE_TIME` will be converted to
          `CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_ABSOLUTE_TIME` by adding `relBefore` to
          the `closeTime` in the `LedgerHeader`. If this addition exceeds
          `INT64_MAX` then use `INT64_MAX`.
        - `CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_RELATIVE_TIME` will be converted to
          `CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_ABSOLUTE_TIME` by adding `relAfter` to the
          `closeTime` in the `LedgerHeader`. If this addition exceeds
          `INT64_MAX` then use `INT64_MAX`.
    - `asset` as specified in the operation
    - `amount` as specified in the operation
    - `reserve` equal to `max(1, claimants.size()-1) * baseReserve`
8. Succeed with `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS`

`CreateClaimableBalanceOp` requires medium threshold because it can be used to
send funds.

#### ClaimClaimableBalanceOp
A `ClaimableBalanceEntry` can only be deleted by the `ClaimClaimableBalanceOp`
operation. `ClaimClaimableBalanceOp` cannot be invalid.

The behavior of `ClaimClaimableBalanceOp` is as follows:

1. Fail with `CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_DOES_NOT_EXIST` if there is no
   `ClaimableBalanceEntry` matching `balanceID`.
2. Fail with `CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_CANNOT_CLAIM` if there is no `i` such that
   `claimants[i].destination = sourceAccount` or if `claimants[i].predicate`
   is not satisfied
3. Skip to step 7 if `createdBy` does not exist
4. Skip to step 7 if `createdBy` does not have at least `reserve` available
   limit of native asset
5. Add `reserve` of native asset to `createdBy`
6. Skip to step 9
7. Fail with `CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_LINE_FULL` if the `sourceAccount` does not
   have at least `reserve` available limit of native asset
8. Add `reserve` of native asset to `sourceAccount`
9. Fail with `CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_AUTHORIZED` if `asset` is not of type
   `ASSET_TYPE_NATIVE` and the `sourceAccount` trust line for `asset` does not
   have the `AUTHORIZED_FLAG` flag set
10. Fail with `CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_LINE_FULL` if the `sourceAccount` does
    not have at least `amount` available limit of `asset`
11. Add `amount` of `asset` to the `sourceAccount`
12. Delete the `ClaimableBalanceEntry`
13. Succeed with `CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS`

`ClaimClaimableBalanceOp` requires low threshold because it can only be used to
transfer funds from a `ClaimableBalanceEntry` to a trust line.

## Design Rationale

### PreparedTrustLineEntry and ClaimableBalanceEntry are not sub-entries
Each `PreparedTrustLineEntry` and `ClaimableBalanceEntry` exists as an
independent entity on the ledger. It is clear that a `PreparedTrustLineEntry`
cannot be a sub-entry of the `accountID` and that a `ClaimableBalanceEntry`
cannot be a sub-entry of any its `claimants`, because it is a security risk for
accounts to be able to add sub-entries to other accounts. But why should these
entries be independent entities on the ledger rather than sub-entries of the
accounts that created them? There are three main benefits of this design:

1. Sending accounts are not limited in the number of prepared trust lines or
   claimable balance entries they can create
2. Sending accounts can be merged even if they created prepared trust lines or
   claimable balance entries that have not yet been claimed
3. Prepared trust lines can be converted unambiguously to trust lines

It is easy to see why the first two benefits are valuable. The third benefit is
more abstract, but facilitates a useful optimization. This can be useful in
asset issuance workflows where the issuer wants to pay for the trust line but
does not want the recipient to spend the funds prior to creating the trust line.
Of course if the base reserve were raised after the `PreparedTrustLIneEntry` was
created then the reserve received would not be sufficient to pay for the trust
line, but they would at least still receive the reserve. But if the
`PreparedTrustLineEntry` were a sub-entry of the sending account and the base
reserve were raised such that the sending account no longer satisfies the
reserve requirement then the receiving account would receive no reserve (because
accounts that do not satisfy the reserve requirement cannot have their native
balance decrease). While this is an unlikely edge case, it does simplify the
behavior of `PreparedTrustLineEntry` by guaranteeing that the receiving account
always receives the reserve.

### ClaimableBalanceEntry claimants are accounts
For each `ClaimableBalanceEntry`, `claimants` contains a finite and immutable
list of accounts that could potentially claim the `ClaimableBalanceEntry`. Even
if the conditions are satisfiable (which is not guaranteed), it is still
possible for the `ClaimableBalanceEntry` to become stranded. If all of the
accounts listed in `claimants` are merged and none of the private keys are
known, then the `ClaimableBalanceEntry` will no longer be claimable.

Suppose that we try to relax this requirement in order to avoid this downside.
We could instead make `claimants` contain a finite and immutable list of public
keys. The operation to claim the `ClaimableBalanceEntry` could then contain a
signature over the tuple `(sourceAccount, balanceID)`. If the signature was not
from one of the public keys that satisfy the conditions, then the operation
would fail. This would allow the appropriate party to claim the
`ClaimableBalanceEntry` into any account that they control. But this would also
make it considerably easier to circumvent authorization restrictions on assets.
For instance, an authorized account could create a `ClaimableBalanceEntry` with
a recipient public key whose private key is known only to some other party. That
party would then control the funds in the `ClaimableBalanceEntry` and could
claim them into any account that is authorized. A similar scheme could be
executed today by changing the signers on an account, but this would only be
possible once per authorized account and cannot separate out a fraction of the
funds. In summary, an approach that could allow `ClaimableBalanceEntry` to be
claimable into any account would significantly weaken the strength of
authorization restrictions.

### Should it be possible to increase the amount of a ClaimableBalanceEntry?
One issue which has been discussed during the development of this proposal is
the absence of a mechanism to increase the `amount` of a
`ClaimableBalanceEntry`. The specific scenario which would warrant this
functionality is when a single account sends many identical payments to a single
account that is not prepared to receive them and does not claim any of the
payments. However, this case is sufficiently specific that we recommend pursuing
it in a separate proposal once this proposal has been implemented. Delaying this
feature presents minimal additional difficulty because `ClaimableBalanceEntry`
has an extension point.

This issue has also been slightly mitigated relative to earlier versions of this
proposal because `ClaimableBalanceEntry` now returns the reserve to the sending
account, whenever possible.

### Pre-authorization is separate from ClaimableBalanceEntry
Earlier versions of this proposal made pre-authorization a feature of a
`ClaimableBalanceEntry`. This was a source of considerable confusion because it
ignored the fact that the following relations hold:

- One trust line has exactly one authorization state
- One trust line has a potentially unbounded number of inbound payments

For example, this led to a potential trap for issuers. An issuer might create
and pre-authorize several claimable balance entries for the same destination. In
this setting, the authorization level of the destination should be viewed as the
maximum (in the sense of `0 < AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG < AUTHORIZED_FLAG`)
of the authorization in the destination trust line and the pre-authorization in
the claimable balance entries. This can be seen because the issuer would have to
reduce the authorization in all of these places in order to achieve a functional
and irreversible change to the authorization. Since we are proposing claimable
balance entries as the solution to complexity in asset issuance protocols, this
pitfall was not an acceptable aspect of the user experience.

Issues like the one described above do not exist in this proposal. There exists
at most one trust line or prepared trust line for a given `accountID` and
`asset`; in other words, they are mutually exclusive. Because authorization is
only stored in a trust line or prepared trust line, that means there is at most
one set of authorization flags for a given `accountID` and `asset`.

This change also resolved confusion about whether it should be valid to
pre-authorize to `AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILIITES_FLAG`. It was illogical to
permit this in the context of `ClaimableBalanceEntry` because claiming a
`ClaimableBalanceEntry` implies the receipt of an asset, which is forbidden by
an account with authorization less than or equal to
`AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG` (in the same sense as above). But by
separating pre-authorization to occur independent of balance transfer, this
issue vanishes.

### CreatePreparedTrustLineOp does not fail if a (prepared) trust line exists
Although the name of the operation is `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp`, a more
accurate description of the behavior would be "ensure that a prepared trust line
exists with appropriate reserve if a trust line does not exist". In other words,
`CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` does not fail if a trust line or prepared trust line
already exists. Instead the behavior is

- Succeed if a trust line exists
- Succeed if a prepared trust line exists and you have sufficient available
  balance of native asset to increase `reserve` to the current `baseReserve`
  (under typical situations, the `reserve` will already be the `baseReserve`)
- Fail otherwise

This is the desired behavior for a variety of reasons. First, consider the case
where a party other than the issuer is creating the prepared trust line. In this
scenario, the party can do nothing more than ensure that a prepared trust line
exists because there is no difference between a prepared trust line created by
them or some other party. Therefore the operation should not fail in this case.
Now if the operation will not fail when a prepared trust line already exists
then it also should not fail when a trust line already exists, because a trust
line is strictly more powerful than a prepared trust line. Second, consider the
case where the issuer is creating the prepared trust line. In this scenario, the
issuer can also use `AllowTrustOp` to set flags on the prepared trust line. But
that operation will behave identically regardless of whether they created the
prepared trust line, a different party created the prepared trust line, or an
actual trust line already exists. Combining this observation with the result for
parties other than the issuer, we conclude that `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp`
should not fail when a prepared trust line or trust line already exists.

From the above analysis, it sounds like `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp` should be
idempotent. It almost is, unless the `baseReserve` has changed in the interim.
Even if a prepared trust line does already exist, the operation still attempts
to raise the `reserve` to the `baseReserve` if `baseReserve > reserve` (it will
not decrease the `reserve` under any circumstances) and fails if the
`sourceAccount` does not have sufficient available balance of native asset. This
functionality was included to make it possible to update the `reserve` in the
event of a `baseReserve` change without adding a special-purpose operation.

If neither a trust line nor a prepared trust line exists, then the required
available balance of native asset will be exactly `baseReserve`. If a prepared
trust line exists, then the required available balance of native asset will be
exactly `max(baseReserve - reserve, 0)` which never exceeds `baseReserve`. If
a trust line exists, then the required available balance of native asset will
be exactly 0. In other words, if the operation fails with
`CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE_LOW_RESERVE` then it would have failed regardless of
the prior existence of a trust line or a prepared trust line.

### Memo
Everything proposed in this document takes the same stance as existing features
of the protocol with regard to memo: memo is a property of a transaction, not of
an operation or a ledger entry.

### Example: Asset Issuance
Asset issuance is a protocol in which an issuer `A` wants to send some amount
`N` of asset `X` (issued by `A`) to a recipient account `B` which

- May or may not exist
- May or may not have a trust line for `X`
- May or may not have sufficient available limit to receive `N` of asset `X`

We will accomplish this using `CreatePreparedTrustLineOp`, `AllowTrustOp`, and
`CreateClaimableBalanceOp`. In this example, we will assume that failure to
claim the funds within 1 week indicates that the recipient has lost access to
their account in which case the issuer can recover the funds.

To do this, the issuer submits the following transaction
```
sourceAccount: A
fee: <FEE>
seqNum: <SEQ_NUM>
timeBounds: <TIME_BOUNDS>
memo:
    type: MEMO_NONE
operations[0]:
    sourceAccount: A
    body:
        type: CREATE_PREPARED_TRUST_LINE
        accountID: B
        asset: X
operations[1]:
    sourceAccount: A
    body:
        type: ALLOW_TRUST
        trustor: B
        asset: X
        authorize: AUTHORIZED_FLAG
operations[2]:
    sourceAccount: A
    body:
        type: CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE
        asset: X
        amount: N
        claimants[0]:
            type: CLAIMANT_TYPE_V0
            destination: B
            predicate:
                type: CLAIM_PREDICATE_BEFORE_RELATIVE_TIME
                relBefore: 604800
        claimants[1]:
            type: CLAIMANT_TYPE_V0
            destination: A
            predicate:
                type: CLAIM_PREDICATE_AFTER_RELATIVE_TIME
                relAfter: 604800
```
where `FEE, SEQ_NUM, and TIME_BOUNDS` are at the discretion of the issuer.

## Backwards Incompatibilities
All downstream systems will need updated XDR in order to recognize the new
operations and ledger entries.

There is a new failure mode for `ChangeTrustOp` which can be triggered if other
parties use prepared trust lines. This can only occur if the `sourceAccount`
does not have `reserve` available limit of native asset. Because the total
supply of native asset is far below `INT64_MAX`, it is reasonable to assume that
this condition will only be trigerred in exceptionally rare cases where accounts
are trying to sell vast amounts of non-native assets in exchange for native.

## Security Concerns
This proposal will slightly reduce the efficacy of base reserve changes, because
a `PreparedTrustLineEntry` or `ClaimableBalanceEntry` that has insufficient
reserve is still usable.

## Test Cases
None yet.

## Implementation
None yet.
