## Preamble

```
CAP: 0002
Title: Transaction level signature verification 
Author: Nicolas Barry
Status: Draft
Created: 2018-05-03
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-core/issues/1464
```

## Simple Summary
Make signature verification behave the same way pre and post consensus
 in order to make smart contracts easier to author.

## Abstract

Perform signature verification (for each operation) before performing
any of the transaction side effects.

This may still allow certain transactions to invalidate future transactions
in the same transaction set, while allowing operations in a transaction to
safely manipulate signers.

## Motivation

Currently signatures are verified in two different ways:
* when building a transaction set for consensus, verification is done without
any of the operation side effects
* when applying transactions post consensus, each operation checks again for
signatures

The problem with this approach is that some operations may cause subsequent
operations in the same transaction to fail, making crafting pre-signed
transactions that manipulate multiple signers or weights very complicated
(or impossible) to implement in the context of multiple operations within
a transaction.

## Specification

Transaction's `doApply` will be modified to perform in order:
1. transaction level changes
    1. sequence number processing
    2. signature verification
        1. verify signatures for each operation
        2. removal of one time signatures
2. operations processing, for each operation: 
    1. validity checks (same as today except for the signature verification)
    2. side effects

## Rationale

This approach makes signature verification behave the same way than how sequence
numbers are now processed (in v10 of the protocol as per cap-0001).

Removal of one time signatures are done first in order to avoid introducing a
new concept of "post transaction side effects" that are not currently modeled
in the meta data.

Note that we *could* add this notion to protocol 10 as cap-001 has not been put
in production yet but the added complexity doesn't seem to be necessary.

## Backwards Compatibility

This change makes certain transaction succeed that are now failing.

There are probably no good use cases for those failures, so it is deemed safe.

The potentially dangerous change is that if a one time signer's weight is
modified, it will be re-created with the new implementation (instead of
deleted in the current implementation) as the deletion happens before
processing operations instead of after.

## Test Cases
Transactions that should now succeed:

### success tx1
```json
// A with signers: {key: B, weight: 1}; weigths=[1,2,2,2]

// transaction that switches A back to a regular account
envelope:
{
    tx: {
        source: A,
        operations:
        [
            [ op: setOptionsOp, masterWeight : 2 ],
            [ op: setOptionsOp, signer : {key:B, w:0} ],
        ]
    },
    signatures: [A, B]
}
```
Failing right now with `txBAD_AUTH_EXTRA`.

### success tx2
```json
// A with signers: {key: B, weight: 1}; weigths=[1,2,2,2]

// transaction that switches A back to a regular account
envelope:
{
    tx:
    {
        source: A,
        operations:
        [
            // deletes B from signers
            [ op: setOptionsOp, signer : {key:B, w:0} ],
            [ op: setOptionsOp, masterWeight : 2 ],
        ]
    },
    signatures: [A, B]
}
```

Failing right now with `txBAD_AUTH`.

### Recreate one time signer tx3
```json
// A with signers: {key: H(Z), weight: 1}; weigths=[1,2,2,2]
envelope:
{
    tx:
    {
        source: A,
        operations:
        [
            [ op: setOptionsOp, signer : {key:H(Z), w:10} ],
            [ op: payment, dest: A, amount: 100]
        ]
    },
    signatures: [Z]
}
```

* old implementation would delete `H(Z)` at the end of the transaction.
* new implementation deletes `H(Z)`, then re-adds it with the first operation.

## Implementation

TBD
