# CAP-0041: Concurrent Transactions

## Preamble

```text
CAP: 0041
Title: Concurrent Transactions
Working Group:
    Owner: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Authors: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, David Mazières <@stanford-scs>
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>, Jonathan Jove <@jonjove>, TBD
Status: Draft
Created: 2021-10-29
Discussion: TBD
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal provides users with the capability to submit transactions to the
Stellar network concurrently, without coordinating the sequence numbers of those
transactions. This capability is limited to transactions that are valid for two
ledgers only, intended for use in the most common payments and transacting use
case where users are building, signing, and submitting transactions immediately.

## Working Group

TBD

## Motivation

Users of the Stellar network must coordinate and navigate the sequence number
for their account when submitting more than one transaction at a time.

Typically this involves throttling payments to be processed serially and risking
one transaction in the chain being invalid preventing a subsequent transaction
from executing.

Users who need to transact concurrently, or who do not wish to risk failed
subsequent transactions, can create a pool of Stellar accounts that exist only
to be the source accounts of transactions to provide sequence numbers.  Users
must create the pool of accounts, maintain their balances to cover transaction
fees, and operate a database or infrastructure supporting synchronized locking
of the accounts. An account is locked when selected for use with a transaction.
An account is unlocked after the transaction is seen as confirmed in a ledger as
successful or failed, or its time bounds have been exceeded by a closed ledger.

These problems are very similar to the problems faced by users of credit network
acquiring payment systems that do not allow concurrent payments on a single
virtual terminal. This problem is one of the problems often abstracted from
merchants of credit networks by payment gateways and payment service providers.

Modern software products perform tasks concurrently and integrate with APIs and
external systems without coordinating or synchronizing on a resource.  These
problems increase the complexity of integrating with the Stellar network, and
create an experience more alike to acquiring payment systems and not modern
concurrent systems.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
create highly usable products.

- The Stellar Network should run at scale and at low cost to all participants of
the network.

- The Stellar Network should enable cross-border payments, i.e. payments via 
exchange of assets, throughout the globe, enabling users to make payments
between assets in a manner that is fast, cheap, and highly usable.

## Abstract

This proposal allows a transaction to be valid if its `seqNum` is zero (`0`), if
the transaction is valid for only two ledgers.

This proposal is dependent on the `ledgerBounds` transaction precondition
proposed in [CAP-21].

## Specification

### XDR changes

```diff mddiffcheck.base=74498070b99a7fb1d18b78d104f95d797b4f4c2c
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
index 1a4e491a..4574a038 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
@@ -1508,7 +1508,10 @@ enum TransactionResultCode
 
     txNOT_SUPPORTED = -12,         // transaction type not supported
     txFEE_BUMP_INNER_FAILED = -13, // fee bump inner transaction failed
-    txBAD_SPONSORSHIP = -14        // sponsorship not confirmed
+    txBAD_SPONSORSHIP = -14,       // sponsorship not confirmed
+
+    txMISSING_MEMO = -15, // transaction is missing a memo and required without sequence number
+    txDUPLICATE = -16     // transaction has been included in a prior ledger
 };
 
 // InnerTransactionResult must be binary compatible with TransactionResult

```

### Semantics

This proposal changes the values that are valid for the `seqNum` of a
`TransactionV1Envelope` to not only the next sequence number of its
`sourceAccount`, but also zero (`0`), if its `ledgerBounds` is set to a non-zero
value and limits the transaction to being valid only for two or less ledgers,
and if it has a memo set.

A transaction submitted will be valid only if had a memo set and, for a next
ledger `n`:
- `ledgerBounds` `minLedger` set to `n-1`, `maxLedger` is set to `n`, and its
hash was not included in `n-1`'s transaction set.
- `ledgerBounds` `minLedger` set to `n`, and `maxLedger` set to `n` or `n+1`.

A transaction submitted with a `seqNum` of zero but whose memo is not set, is
rejected with `TransactonResultCode` `txMISSING_MEMO`.

A transaction submitted with a `seqNum` of zero that does not satisfy the
`ledgerBounds` requirements is rejected with `TransactionResultCode`
`txTOO_LATE` if its `maxLedger` is less than the next ledger, or `txTOO_EARLY`
if its `minLedger` is greater than the next ledger.

A transaction submitted with a `seqNum` of zero satisfies the `ledgerBounds`
requirements, but whose hash is included in the last ledgers transaction set, is
rejected with `TransactionResultCode` `txDUPLICATE`.

This proposal introduces a new `TransactionResultCode` `txDUPLICATE` that is
used whenever a transaction is submitted a subsequent time after it has been
included in a past ledger, and no other condition makes the transaction invalid.

This proposal introduces a new `TransactionResultCode` `txMISSING_MEMO` that is
used whenever a transaction is submitted a `seqNum` zero without a memo. 

## Design Rationale

Sequence numbers allow the protocol to guarantee that no replay of a transaction
is ever possible for an account, forever, without a validator needing to
remember all transactions that have been included in past ledgers. This reduces
the storage and lookup costs for a validator.

However, for the majority of transactions on the Stellar network sequence
numbers do not need to provide this guarantee forever. The majority of users of
the Stellar network build, sign, and submit transactions immediately with an
expectation of success or failure within a single ledger. Even though the
Stellar network provides a transaction queue which allow transactions to be
accepted in a near future ledger during congestion, most application developers
assume success or failure within a single ledger. We could argue from this
behavior by application developers that they do not signal a need for most
transactions to be valid for more than a single ledger.

These qualities of the majority of use cases submitting transactions to the
network indicate that the network does not need to prevent replay using sequence
numbers forever.

Validators can efficiently check that a transaction has not occurred in the last
ledger with limited storage or memory requirements since the data set is limited
to the transactions in a single ledger.

### Sequence Number Zero

The zero (`0`) sequence number is selected because it has no meaning within the
Stellar protocol since no transaction is valid with that value. The zero value
is also the default integer value and in the Stellar protocol the zero value is
routinely used as an indicator of no value being set, as is the case in
`TimeBounds`. The zero (`0`) sequence number does have meaning in [SEP-10] as a
method for creating a Stellar transaction that is guaranteed to be invalid on
any Stellar network, however that invariance of invalidity can be maintained by
[SEP-10] transactions never setting the `ledgerBounds` field of a transaction.

### Ledger Bounds

The `ledgerBounds` precondition proposed in [CAP-21] allows a user to define a
transaction that is valid only for a fixed range of ledgers. The precondition
allows a user to specify that a transaction is valid only for the next ledger,
and is more accurate at achieving this than `timeBounds`.

of ledgers. The precondition allows a user to specify that a transaction is
valid only for the next ledger, and is more accurate at achieving this than
`timeBounds`.

### Transaction Result Code Missing Memo

The `TransactionResultCode` `txMISSING_MEMO` is introduced because submitting a
sequenceless transaction without a memo is unlikely to guarantee any uniquely
identifying data that will differentiate two conceptually unique transactions
that happen to contain the same logical operations.

### Transaction Result Code Duplicate

The `TransactionResultCode` `txDUPLICATE` is introduced because other result
codes semantics do not fit the case where the `ledgerBounds` are valid, there is
no sequence number, but a transaction is invalid due to replay. When a duplicate
transaction is submitted with the protocol today it will likely receive a
`txBAD_SEQ` result code, however in this case the sequence number is zero or not
set.

This result code will not be seen by most users because Horizon's transaction
submission system provides idempotency, identifying duplicate submissions and
returning the previous result.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

This proposal is completely backwards compatible as it defines new functionality
that is only accessible with transactions that are currently invalid.

### Resource Utilization

This proposal requires validators to check that a transaction has not been
included in the last ledger if it has a zero sequence number, and with
`ledgerBounds` set to a range no greater than two ledgers, where that range
overlaps with the last ledger and the next ledger. This will require a cost of
lookup trending towards O(1) assuming a hash set, map, dictionary, or similar
data structure can be used. The size of the data set will be limited to the
number of operations permitted into any ledger. At this time that limit is 1000
operations. Therefore, the data set will be at most 1000 transactions, and will
consume at least 32KB if stored in memory, assuming transaction hashes are 32
bytes.

This proposal requires validators to hold a list of all transactions hashes from
the last ledger. Validators typically already store a list of the transactions
from a number of recent ledgers and so no new storage is expected.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.

[CAP-21]: https://stellar.org/protocol/cap-21
[SEP-10]: https://stellar.org/protocol/sep-10
