# CAP-0036: Claimable Balance Clawback

## Preamble

```text
CAP: 0036
Title: Claimable Balance Clawback
Working Group:
    Owner: Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
    Authors: Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>, Jon Jove <@jonjove>, Dan Doney (Securrency, Inc.), Eric Saunders <@ire-and-curses>
Status: Draft
Created: 2020-12-16
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/g/stellar-dev/c/hPhkXhrl5-Y/m/ZF6eJcqKAgAJ
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal provides the Issuer with a means to claim assets stored in
claimable balances in order to support regulatory requirements. This function
can be used to: 

1) recover assets that have been fraudulently obtained 
2) respond to regulatory actions, if required 
3) enable identity proofed persons to recover an enabled asset
in the event of loss of key custody or theft. 

The proposal does not involve shared custody of the person’s account and does
not affect custody of bearer assets in the persons account.

## Working Group

This protocol change is being developed in conjunction with CAP-35 which was
initially by Dan Doney and Tomer Weller. The working group include other authors
and the consulted persons include key individuals familiar with the
implementation of the core protocol and maintainers of Horizon and its SDKs.

## Motivation

This protocol change shares the same motivations as CAP-35.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should be secure and reliable.

- The Stellar Network should enable cross-border payments, i.e. payments via 
exchange of assets, throughout the globe, enabling users to make payments between 
assets in a manner that is fast, cheap, and highly usable.

## Abstract

This proposal introduces a new `ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` operation. The
`AUTH_RECOVERABLE` flag on the issuing account must be set to authorize a
`ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` operation submitted by the Issuing account.  The
`ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` operation results in the claiming of a specific
`ClaimableBalanceEntry`. The `ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` operation only applies
to assets issued by the source account. Assets that are revocable can be easily
distinguished from traditional blockchain assets (bearer instruments) so that
asset owners are aware of rights. The transaction results in revocation of all
of the specified asset from the claimable balance and the claimable balance is
destroyed as if it had been claimed by a claimaint.

## Specification

### XDR changes

```c
struct ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp
{
    ClaimableBalanceID balanceID;
};

struct Operation
{
    // sourceAccount is the account used to run the operation
    // if not set, the runtime defaults to "sourceAccount" specified at
    // the transaction level
    AccountID* sourceAccount;

    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    // ... CREATE_ACOUNT, ..., PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND unchanged ...
    case CLAWBACK_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE:
        ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp clawbackClaimableBalanceOp;
    }
    body;
};

enum ClawbackClaimableBalanceResultCode
{
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS = 0,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_DOES_NOT_EXIST = -1,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_ISSUER = -2,
    CLAIM_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_REVOCABLE = -3
};
```

### Semantics
An issuer clawing back a `ClaimableBalanceEntry` operates similar to auth
revocation and the `ClawbackOp` operation introduced in CAP-35. Account auth
recovation freezes the full balance of an asset in an account, clawback from an
account provides fine grain control and allows an issuer to take out of an
account and destroy a specific amount of an asset, and clawback of a claimable
balance entry performs the same logical operation on amounts of an asset stored
in a claimable balance.

In order to execute a clawback on a claimable balance, an issuer account must
have its `AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag set. Once set, the issuer submits a
`ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` operation in the same way a claimant can submit a
`ClaimClaimableBalanceOp`. No predicates on the `ClaimableBalanceEntry` impact the success of the clawback.

This operation does not require the signature of any claimaint accounts, or the
signature of the account that created the claimable balance. The amount of the
asset clawed back is burned and is not sent to any other address since the
return of an asset to the . The issuer may reissue the asset to the same account
or to another account if the intent of the clawback is to move the asset to
another account.

#### Account
This proposal uses the existing `AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag in the issuer account
`AccountFlags`. Existing behavior and meaning of the flag is unchanged.

#### ClawbackClaimableBalance Operation
The `ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` operation destroys a claimable balance effectively returning the asset to the issuer, and burning the asset stored within.

The clawback operation requires a medium threshold signature to authorize the
operation.

Possible return values for the `ClawbackClaimableBalanceOp` are:
- `CLAWBACK_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_SUCCESS` if the clawback is successful.
- `CLAWBACK_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_DOES_NOT_EXIST` if the claimable balance does not
  exist.
- `CLAWBACK_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_ISSUER` if the `sourceAccount` is not the
  issuer account of the asset stored in the `ClaimableBalanceEntry`.
- `CLAWBACK_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE_NOT_REVOCABLE` if the `AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag is not set
  on the `sourceAccount`.

## Design Rationale
The rationale for this proposal extends the rational as described in CAP-35. Claimable balances store value on the network and the same events of regulatory action, erroneous transaction, or loss of custody of a claimaint account, can result in an issuer needing to reissue an asset stored within a claimable balance. CAP-35 adds this capability to assets stored in accounts, and this proposal provides the same functionality to claimable balances.

CAP-35 allows an issuer to clawback specific amounts within an account but this proposal limits clawback to the full amount within the claimable balance. Claimable balances are immutable and there would be massive downstream impacts to changing the amount within a claimable balance.

Claimable balances cannot be recreated after they are destroyed with clawback because their claimable balance ID is generated from the transaction that creates them, and to recreate the same claimable balance would duplicate events in downstream systems. Issuers can reissue the asset in a new claimable balance configured with the same claimaints and predicates to recreate the claimable balance, but the claimable balance ID will not be identical. 
 
### Reusing the AUTH_REVOCABLE flag
The account `AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag allows the issuer to indicate that it has
control over the use of the asset on the network. By including the
`AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag in account flags, account owners may review the
revocability of an asset issued by the issuer and have the choice to avoid this
type of asset if they object to the implied trust in the issuer. Clawback is
another form of an issuer revoking use of an asset with fine control over the
exact amount that the issuer is taking out of active circulation.

### Threshold
The clawback operation requires a medium threshold signature because it is
changing the balance of an account and is more aligned with impact to a payment
operation than an allow trust operation.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

The change does not have an affect on previous assets, accounts, or transaction 
structure. It should not cause a breaking change in existing implementations. 

The change does make it possible for claimable balances to be destroyed, and
claimable balances could form an important part of series of transactions that
form a logical contract. The use of a clawback could break existing contracts
that did not consider the possibility of clawback. Issuers today who use the
`AUTH_REVOCABLE` flag get the same capability by freezing claimaint accounts.
Auth revocation is reversable meaning an accidental auth revocation if reversed
would have no impact on a planned series of transactions that form a logical
contract. However, a clawed back claimable balance recreated would have a new
claimable balance ID and would not be claimable with pre-signed or
pre-authorized transactions.
 
### Resource Utilization
No substantial changes to resource utilization.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.
