## Preamble

```
CAP: 0006
Title: Add ManageBuyOffer Operation
Author: Jonathan Jove
Status: Final
Created: 2018-10-24
Discussion: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/issues/180
Protocol version: 11
```

## Simple Summary
We introduce the `ManageBuyOffer` operation with functionality similar to the
`ManageOffer` operation except that the amount is specified in terms of the
`buying` asset instead of the `selling` asset.

## Abstract
The `ManageOffer` operation specifies the maximum amount of the `selling` asset
that should be sold by the offer. It is not, however, possible to express the
maximum amount of the `buying` asset that should be bought by the offer. These
constraints are not equivalent because at the time of offer submission it is not
known at what price the offer will execute. We propose to add a new operation
called `ManageBuyOffer` which specifies the maximum amount of the `buying` asset
that should be bought by the offer. The price will be the "price of thing being
bought in terms of what you are selling" rather than the "price of thing being
sold in terms of what you are buying". The behavior is otherwise analogous to
the extant `ManageOffer` operation.

## Motivation
Many financial institutions have an obligation to faithfully execute customer
orders. Customer orders to sell a certain quantity of an asset in exchange for
the maximum quantity of a different asset are already easily expressed in terms
of the `ManageOffer` operation. In contrast, customer orders to buy a certain
quantity of an asset in exchange for the minimum quantity of a different asset
are not expressible in terms of the `ManageOffer` operation. We introduce the
`ManageBuyOffer` operation to facilitate the execution of the latter kind of
order.

## Specification
`ManageBuyOfferOp` specification:
```c++
struct ManageBuyOfferOp
{
    Asset selling;
    Asset buying;
    int64 buyAmount; // amount being bought. if set to 0, delete the offer
    Price price;     // price of thing being bought in terms of what you are
                     // selling

    // 0=create a new offer, otherwise edit an existing offer
    int64 offerID;
};

/******* ManageBuyOffer Result ********/

enum ManageBuyOfferResultCode
{
    // codes considered as "success" for the operation
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_SUCCESS = 0,

    // codes considered as "failure" for the operation
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_MALFORMED = -1,     // generated offer would be invalid
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_SELL_NO_TRUST = -2, // no trust line for what we're selling
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_BUY_NO_TRUST = -3,  // no trust line for what we're buying
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_SELL_NOT_AUTHORIZED = -4, // not authorized to sell
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_BUY_NOT_AUTHORIZED = -5,  // not authorized to buy
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_LINE_FULL = -6,      // can't receive more of what it's buying
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_UNDERFUNDED = -7,    // doesn't hold what it's trying to sell
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_CROSS_SELF = -8,     // would cross an offer from the same user
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_SELL_NO_ISSUER = -9, // no issuer for what we're selling
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_BUY_NO_ISSUER = -10, // no issuer for what we're buying

    // update errors
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_NOT_FOUND = -11, // offerID does not match an existing offer

    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_LOW_RESERVE = -12 // not enough funds to create a new Offer
};

union ManageBuyOfferResult switch (ManageBuyOfferResultCode code)
{
case MANAGE_BUY_OFFER_SUCCESS:
    ManageOfferSuccessResult success;
default:
    void;
};
```

Name changes are binary compatible, so for better naming consistency:

- `MANAGE_OFFER` will be renamed to `MANAGE_SELL_OFFER`
- `ManageOfferOp` will be renamed to `ManageSellOfferOp`
- `ManageOfferResult` will be renamed to `ManageSellOfferResult`

Additionally, we will update naming for `ManageOfferResultCode` to be
```c++
enum ManageSellOfferResultCode
{
    // codes considered as "success" for the operation
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_SUCCESS = 0,

    // codes considered as "failure" for the operation
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_MALFORMED = -1,     // generated offer would be invalid
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_SELL_NO_TRUST = -2, // no trust line for what we're selling
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_BUY_NO_TRUST = -3,  // no trust line for what we're buying
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_SELL_NOT_AUTHORIZED = -4, // not authorized to sell
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_BUY_NOT_AUTHORIZED = -5,  // not authorized to buy
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_LINE_FULL = -6,      // can't receive more of what it's buying
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_UNDERFUNDED = -7,    // doesn't hold what it's trying to sell
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_CROSS_SELF = -8,     // would cross an offer from the same user
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_SELL_NO_ISSUER = -9, // no issuer for what we're selling
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_BUY_NO_ISSUER = -10, // no issuer for what we're buying

    // update errors
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_NOT_FOUND = -11, // offerID does not match an existing offer

    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_LOW_RESERVE = -12 // not enough funds to create a new Offer
};
```

Updated `Operation` specification:
```c++
enum OperationType
{
    CREATE_ACCOUNT = 0,
    PAYMENT = 1,
    PATH_PAYMENT = 2,
    MANAGE_SELL_OFFER = 3,
    CREATE_PASSIVE_OFFER = 4,
    SET_OPTIONS = 5,
    CHANGE_TRUST = 6,
    ALLOW_TRUST = 7,
    ACCOUNT_MERGE = 8,
    INFLATION = 9,
    MANAGE_DATA = 10,
    BUMP_SEQUENCE = 11,
    MANAGE_BUY_OFFER = 12
};

struct Operation
{
    // sourceAccount is the account used to run the operation
    // if not set, the runtime defaults to "sourceAccount" specified at
    // the transaction level
    AccountID* sourceAccount;

    union switch (OperationType type)
    {
    case CREATE_ACCOUNT:
        CreateAccountOp createAccountOp;
    case PAYMENT:
        PaymentOp paymentOp;
    case PATH_PAYMENT:
        PathPaymentOp pathPaymentOp;
    case MANAGE_SELL_OFFER:
        ManageSellOfferOp manageSellOfferOp;
    case CREATE_PASSIVE_OFFER:
        CreatePassiveOfferOp createPassiveOfferOp;
    case SET_OPTIONS:
        SetOptionsOp setOptionsOp;
    case CHANGE_TRUST:
        ChangeTrustOp changeTrustOp;
    case ALLOW_TRUST:
        AllowTrustOp allowTrustOp;
    case ACCOUNT_MERGE:
        AccountID destination;
    case INFLATION:
        void;
    case MANAGE_DATA:
        ManageDataOp manageDataOp;
    case BUMP_SEQUENCE:
        BumpSequenceOp bumpSequenceOp;
    case MANAGE_BUY_OFFER:
        ManageBuyOfferOp manageBuyOfferOp;
    }
    body;
};
```

## Rationale
Adding `ManageBuyOffer` will not require modifying what data is contained in the
ledger. This can be understood by considering offer execution as two distinct
processes. The first process begins when an offer is submitted. If this offer
matches against an existing offer, then those offers must execute at the price
of the existing offer. This repeats until either the submitted offer has
executed entirely or the submitted offer does not match against any existing
offer. During this first process, limits on the buying amount are not equivalent
to limits on the selling amount since the execution price is variable.

The second process begins with adding to the offer book the remainder of the
offer submitted at the start of the first process, if that offer was not already
executed entirely. Any subsequent execution of this offer will occur at the
price of this offer, unless the offer is modified (in which case the first
process begins anew). Therefore, a limit on the buying amount is equivalent to
a limit on the selling amount during the second process.

At this point, it is clear what the semantics of the `ManageBuyOffer` operation
should be. During the first process, which is a subset of the apply-phase of the
operation, the total amount that can be executed is limited by the `buyAmount`
specified in the `ManageBuyOfferOp`. At the start of the second process, the
remaining `buyAmount` is converted into a sell amount and stored in the ledger,
analogous to what would be done with the remaining `amount` at the end of
`ManageOffer`. The `price` must also be inverted before it is stored in the
ledger.

There is, however, one important caveat to all of the above. At the end of the
day, offers are stored on the ledger as sell offers which means that the amount
is a sell amount. When rounding occurs in favor of an offer, it may receive more
of the asset that is not limited than would be otherwise expected. During the
first process, this does not cause an issue for either `ManageBuyOffer` or
`ManageSellOffer` as each has a limit in terms of the appropriate asset. But, as
noted, in the ledger all limits are on the selling asset so it is possible for
`ManageBuyOffer` to buy more than expected during the second process.

### Why is the price inverted?
As noted in the abstract, the price will be the "price of thing being bought in
terms of what you are selling" rather than the "price of thing being sold in
terms of what you are buying". There are three main reasons for this interface:

1. When making a market, `ManageSellOfferOp` and `ManageBuyOfferOp` will have
prices that appear in the same units:
    - The price in `ManageSellOfferOp{selling=X, buying=Y, amount=A, price=P}`
is the "price of thing being sold in terms of what you are buying" so it is the
"price of X in terms of Y"
    - The price in `ManageBuyOfferOp{selling=Y, buying=X, buyAmount=A, price=P}`
is the "price of thing being bought in terms of what you are selling" so it is
the "price of X in terms of Y"
2. As an extension of (1), if `{selling=X, buying=Y, amount=A, price=P}`
represents the best offer in a given market, then it can be exactly crossed by
submitting `ManageBuyOfferOp{selling=Y, buying=X, buyAmount=A, price=P}`
3. Converting the sell amount in `ManageSellOfferOp` to an equivalent buy amount
is accomplished by computing `amount * price`; converting the buy amount in
`ManageBuyOfferOp` to an equivalent sell amount is accomplished by computing
`buyAmount * price`

### Validation result codes
In implementing `ManageBuyOffer`, it was observed that `ManageOffer` does not
respect the convention that failure to validate should only return an error code
labeled `MALFORMED`. `ManageBuyOffer` should respect this convention, and for
consistency `ManageSellOffer` should also respect this convention starting in
the protocol version which implements this proposal. Specifically validation of
`ManageSellOffer` will return `MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_MALFORMED` instead of
`MANAGE_SELL_OFFER_NOT_FOUND`.

## Backwards Compatibility
This proposal is fully backward compatible.

## Test Cases
Some test cases that must be considered include:

* If `ManageBuyOffer` and `ManageSellOfferOp` have the same max send and max
receive after crossing offers, then the same offer is added to the ledger
* `ManageBuyOffer` properly accounts for [liabilities](cap-0003.md)

## Implementation
No implementation yet.
