## Preamble

```
CAP: 0021
Title: Preconditions: Generalized transaction preconditions
Working Group:
    Owner: David Mazières <@stanford-scs>
    Authors: David Mazières <@stanford-scs>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>
Status: Final
Created: 2019-05-24
Updated: 2021-11-03
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/g/stellar-dev/c/N8vzP2Mi89U
Protocol version: 19
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal generalizes the `timeBounds` field in `Transaction` to
support other conditions, including conditions that relax sequence
number checking and provide relative timelocks.

## Motivation

Sequence numbers are tricky for anything other than simple payments.
For instance, pre-authorized transactions can only execute when the
source account has a specific sequence number.  Worse yet, sequence
numbers make it difficult for protocols such as payment channels to
guarantee that one participant can execute a transaction signed by all
participants.  In general, an N-party protocol requires N auxiliary
accounts, one for each participant; each logical transaction
pre-signed by all N participants must actually be implemented as N
pre-signed transactions using each auxiliary account at a source, so
that one participant can still submit a pre-signed transaction even if
another participant has changed the sequence number on a different
auxiliary account.  This is further complicated by the need to
maintain a reserve balance on each auxiliary account.

### Goals Alignment

This proposal advances network scalability by facilitating off-chain
payment channels.  It advances security and simplicity and
interoperability with other networks by enabling relative timelocks.
Finally, the proposal makes it easier for developers to create highly
usable products by enabling time-delayed key recovery.

## Abstract

This proposal extends `AccountEntry` to keep track of the time and
ledger number at which the account's sequence number was last changed.
It also replaces the `timeBounds` field of `Transaction` with a union
that allows more general transaction preconditions.  One of these
preconditions requires that the sequence number of `sourceAccount`
have been modified at least some period of time in the past,
effectively providing a relative timelock.  Another precondition
optionally weakens sequence number checking so as to allow a
transaction to execute when the `sourceAccount` is within some range.

## Specification

`AccountEntryExtensionV2`'s `ext` field is extended to keep track of
`seqLedger` and `seqTime`--the ledger number and time at which the
sequence number was set to its present value. These values are updated
in two situations:

1. Transaction: For the `sourceAccount` of every executed transaction.

2. `BumpSequenceOp` operation: For the `sourceAccount` of every
successfully executed `BumpSequenceOp` operation, regardless of whether
the `BumpSequenceOp` actually increased or modified the sequence number
of the account. This allows an account to update it's `seqLedger`
or `seqTime` without using an additional sequence number.

If an account does not have an `AccountEntryExtensionV3` because it
hasn't been upgraded yet, then it behaves as if `seqLedger` and
`seqTime` are both 0.

```c++
// An ExtensionPoint is always marshaled as a 32-bit 0 value.  At a
// later point, it can be replaced by a different union so as to
// extend a structure.
union ExtensionPoint switch (int v) {
case 0:
     void;
};

struct AccountEntryExtensionV3
{
    // We can use this to add more fields, or because it is first, to
    // change AccountEntryExtensionV3 into a union.
    ExtensionPoint ext;

    // Ledger number at which `seqNum` took on its present value.
    uint32 seqLedger;

    // Time at which `seqNum` took on its present value.
    TimePoint seqTime;
};

struct AccountEntryExtensionV2
{
    uint32 numSponsored;
    uint32 numSponsoring;
    SponsorshipDescriptor signerSponsoringIDs<MAX_SIGNERS>;

    union switch (int v)
    {
    case 0:
        void;
    case 3:
        AccountEntryExtensionV3 v3;
    }
    ext;
};
```

Preconditions are represented by a new `Preconditions` union with
discriminant `type`.  Values `PRECOND_NONE` and `PRECOND_TIME` are
binary compatible with the current `timeBounds` field (which is of
type `TimeBounds*`).  Value `PRECOND_V2` is the new type of
precondition.  Note that `minSeqNum`, if non-NULL, relaxes the range
of sequence numbers at which a transaction can be executed.  However,
after executing a transaction, `sourceAccount`'s sequence number is
always set to the transaction's `seqNum`--like an implicit
`BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation.  This guarantees transactions cannot be
replayed, even when the previous account `seqNum` is well below the
transaction's `seqNum`.  The final element of `Preconditions` is an
array of extra signers required for the transaction.  This can be used
with `SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X` to sign a transaction that can only be
executed in exchange for disclosing a hash preimage.

Note that a `TransactionV1Envelope` may contain at most 20 signatures.
Any signatures required by the `extraSigners` field reside in the
`TransactionV1Envelope` and hence must reside in the same 20 signature
slots.  As a consequence, a transaction that would require 20
signatures without an `extraSigners` field generally cannot contain
`extraSigners` unless the `extraSigners` are satisfied by the same
signatures as the `sourceAccount`s.

```c++
typedef uint64 Duration;

struct LedgerBounds {
    uint32 minLedger;
    uint32 maxLedger;
};

struct PreconditionsV2 {
    TimeBounds *timeBounds;

    // Transaction only valid for ledger numbers n such that
    // minLedger <= n < maxLedger (if maxLedger == 0, then
    // only minLedger is checked)
    LedgerBounds *ledgerBounds;

    // If NULL, only valid when sourceAccount's sequence number
    // is seqNum - 1.  Otherwise, valid when sourceAccount's
    // sequence number n satisfies minSeqNum <= n < tx.seqNum.
    // Note that after execution the account's sequence number
    // is always raised to tx.seqNum.
    SequenceNumber *minSeqNum;

    // For the transaction to be valid, the current ledger time must
    // be at least minSeqAge greater than sourceAccount's seqTime.
    Duration minSeqAge;

    // For the transaction to be valid, the current ledger number
    // must be at least minSeqLedgerGap greater than sourceAccount's
    // seqLedger.
    uint32 minSeqLedgerGap;

    // For the transaction to be valid, there must be a signature
    // corresponding to every Signer in this array, even if the
    // signature is not otherwise required by the sourceAccount or
    // operations.
    SignerKey extraSigners<2>;
};

enum PreconditionType {
    PRECOND_NONE = 0,
    PRECOND_TIME = 1,
    PRECOND_V2 = 2
};

union Preconditions switch (PreconditionType type) {
    case PRECOND_NONE:
        void;
    case PRECOND_TIME:
        TimeBounds timeBounds;
    case PRECOND_V2:
        PreconditionsV2 v2;
};
```

Note we add an unsigned `Duration` type, used by `minSeqAge`.

We make use of the new `Preconditions` type by replacing `timeBounds`
in the `Transaction` structure as follows:

```c++
struct Transaction
{
    // account used to run the transaction
    MuxedAccount sourceAccount;

    // the fee the sourceAccount will pay
    uint32 fee;

    // sequence number to consume in the account
    SequenceNumber seqNum;

    // validity conditions
    Preconditions cond;

    ...
};
```

A transaction whose preconditions are not satisfied is
_non-executable_.  In most cases, non-executable transactions should
not be included in blocks.  However, it is possible that a prior
transaction in the same block can turn a executable transaction into a
non-executable one.  If this happens, the non-executable transaction
still incurs a fee and increments the `sourceAccount` sequence number.

To minimize the presence of non-executable transactions in blocks, a
block may not contain both a transaction with a non-zero
`minSeqLedgerGap` or `minSeqAge` and one with a lower `seqNum` on the
same `sourceAccount`.  Unfortunately, this does not entirely eliminate
the possibility of non-executable transactions in blocks; for
instance, a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation in a transaction from a
different `sourceAccount` can invalidate the `minSeqAge` or
`minSeqLedgerGap` on another transaction.

### Transaction forwarding and ordering

A transaction submitted to the network is valid only if it is part of
a valid series of pending transactions on the same `sourceAccount`
that can all be valid in the same block.  For example, if a source
account has `seqNum` 10, then a submitted transaction with `seqNum` 12
and no preconditions is valid (and should be forwarded) only if there
is also a pending valid transaction with sequence number 11.  The
`minSeqNum` field in this proposal relaxes validity to allow a valid
series of transactions on the same `sourceAccount` with discontinuous
`seqNum` fields. The gaps, however, cannot be filled in (if the queue
already had `seqNum` 10 and 12 with a valid gap, 11 should not be
accepted and forwarded). Regardless of these gaps, all transactions on the
same `sourceAccount` in the same block must be executed in order of
increasing `seqNum`.  Hence, the presence of the `minSeqNum` field may
make transactions valid that would not otherwise be valid, but cannot
invalidate otherwise valid transactions, since lower `seqNum` fields
always execute first before higher ones that would invalidate them.

A transaction with a non-zero `minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap` must be
discarded and not forwarded--as if its `minTime` has not yet
arrived--if either A) the appropriate condition (`minSeqAge` or
`minSeqLedgerGap`) does not yet hold, or B) there are pending valid
transactions with lower sequence numbers on the same `sourceAccount`.
Conversely, after receiving and forwarding a valid transaction with a
non-zero `minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap`, subsequently received
transactions with earlier sequence numbers must be discarded.
However, a nominated block is valid so long as its transactions can be
executed.  This means a validator can vote for a block containing
transactions that the validator would have discarded.  For example,
consider the following two transactions on the same `sourceAccount`
which currently has `seqNum` 10:

* T1 has `seqNum` 11 and no preconditions.
* T2 has `seqNum` 12, `minSeqNum` 10, and `minSeqLedgerGap` 1.

Any validator that receives both of these transactions will keep the
first one and discard the second one that it receives.  However, if a
validator sees a nomination vote for a block that contains T2 but not
T1, the validator will nonetheless vote for the block.  The logic is
identical to a situation in which T1 and T2 have the same sequence
number and fee--validators seeing both will discard the second one
that they receive.

### Transaction validation

The `Preconditions` in each transaction of a block are validated
twice.

The first validation occurs when checking that a block itself is valid
and can be nominated by the consensus protocol.  As part of the
validation, for each `sourceAccount` there can be only one transaction
with a given sequence number and the `seqNum` fields must either be
consecutive or any gaps must be permitted by non-NULL `minSeqNum`
fields.  All but the transaction with the lowest `seqNum` on a given
`sourceAccount` must have 0 for the `minSeqAge` and `minSeqLedgerGap`
fields.

Once a block is externalized by the consensus algorithm, the block is
applied.  Before executing any operations, fees are charged to the
source account for all transactions.  Once fees have been deducted
from all accounts, transactions are one-by-one validated a second time
then executed.  It is possible for a previously valid transaction to
fail the second validation, for instance if a `BUMP_SEQUENCE`
operation made the sequence number invalid.  Whenever a transaction
fails validation during execution, the `sourceAccount` loses the fee.

Because `PreconditionsV2` specifies multiple pre-conditions, there may be
multiple reasons why a transaction is invalid. If `extraSigners` contains
duplicate signers, the transaction is rejected with `txMALFORMED` (Note that
signer overlap between `extraSigners` and `AccountEntry` signers is allowed). If
the `maxTime` (inclusive) or `maxLedger` (exclusive) have not been satisfied--
then the transaction is rejected with `TransactionResultCode` `txTOO_LATE`. If
`minTime` or `minLedger` have not been reached yet, then the transaction is
rejected with `txTOO_EARLY`. If `minSeqNum` is set, but the relaxed sequence
number validation still fails, then the transaction is rejected with
`txBAD_SEQ`. If the failure is due to `minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap`, then the
transaction is rejected with the new `txBAD_MIN_SEQ_AGE_OR_GAP` error code. If
none of the above conditions holds (`txTOO_EARLY`, `txBAD_MIN_SEQ_AGE_OR_GAP`,
`txMALFORMED`, `txBAD_SEQ`, and `txTOO_LATE` do not apply), but one of the
`extraSigners` is unsatisfied, then the transaction fails with `txBAD_AUTH`.

### XDR diff

```diff mddiffcheck.base=v17.3.0
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
index c870fe09..5c772f1c 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-ledger-entries.x
@@ -13,6 +13,7 @@ typedef string string32<32>;
 typedef string string64<64>;
 typedef int64 SequenceNumber;
 typedef uint64 TimePoint;
+typedef uint64 Duration;
 typedef opaque DataValue<64>;
 typedef Hash PoolID; // SHA256(LiquidityPoolParameters)
 
@@ -133,6 +134,19 @@ const MAX_SIGNERS = 20;
 
 typedef AccountID* SponsorshipDescriptor;
 
+struct AccountEntryExtensionV3
+{
+    // We can use this to add more fields, or because it is first, to
+    // change AccountEntryExtensionV3 into a union.
+    ExtensionPoint ext;
+
+    // Ledger number at which `seqNum` took on its present value.
+    uint32 seqLedger;
+
+    // Time at which `seqNum` took on its present value.
+    TimePoint seqTime;
+};
+
 struct AccountEntryExtensionV2
 {
     uint32 numSponsored;
@@ -143,6 +157,8 @@ struct AccountEntryExtensionV2
     {
     case 0:
         void;
+    case 3:
+        AccountEntryExtensionV3 v3;
     }
     ext;
 };
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
index 1a4e491a..811e4786 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x
@@ -576,6 +576,58 @@ struct TimeBounds
     TimePoint maxTime; // 0 here means no maxTime
 };
 
+struct LedgerBounds
+{
+    uint32 minLedger;
+    uint32 maxLedger; // 0 here means no maxLedger
+};
+
+struct PreconditionsV2 {
+    TimeBounds *timeBounds;
+
+    // Transaction only valid for ledger numbers n such that
+    // minLedger <= n < maxLedger (if maxLedger == 0, then
+    // only minLedger is checked)
+    LedgerBounds *ledgerBounds;
+
+    // If NULL, only valid when sourceAccount's sequence number
+    // is seqNum - 1.  Otherwise, valid when sourceAccount's
+    // sequence number n satisfies minSeqNum <= n < tx.seqNum.
+    // Note that after execution the account's sequence number
+    // is always raised to tx.seqNum.
+    SequenceNumber *minSeqNum;
+
+    // For the transaction to be valid, the current ledger time must
+    // be at least minSeqAge greater than sourceAccount's seqTime.
+    Duration minSeqAge;
+
+    // For the transaction to be valid, the current ledger number
+    // must be at least minSeqLedgerGap greater than sourceAccount's
+    // seqLedger.
+    uint32 minSeqLedgerGap;
+
+    // For the transaction to be valid, there must be a signature
+    // corresponding to every Signer in this array, even if the
+    // signature is not otherwise required by the sourceAccount or
+    // operations.
+    SignerKey extraSigners<2>;
+};
+
+enum PreconditionType {
+    PRECOND_NONE = 0,
+    PRECOND_TIME = 1,
+    PRECOND_V2 = 2
+};
+
+union Preconditions switch (PreconditionType type) {
+    case PRECOND_NONE:
+        void;
+    case PRECOND_TIME:
+        TimeBounds timeBounds;
+    case PRECOND_V2:
+        PreconditionsV2 v2;
+};
+
 // maximum number of operations per transaction
 const MAX_OPS_PER_TX = 100;
 
@@ -627,8 +679,8 @@ struct Transaction
     // sequence number to consume in the account
     SequenceNumber seqNum;
 
-    // validity range (inclusive) for the last ledger close time
-    TimeBounds* timeBounds;
+    // validity conditions
+    Preconditions cond;
 
     Memo memo;
 
@@ -1508,7 +1560,9 @@ enum TransactionResultCode
 
     txNOT_SUPPORTED = -12,         // transaction type not supported
     txFEE_BUMP_INNER_FAILED = -13, // fee bump inner transaction failed
-    txBAD_SPONSORSHIP = -14        // sponsorship not confirmed
+    txBAD_SPONSORSHIP = -14,        // sponsorship not confirmed
+    txBAD_MIN_SEQ_AGE_OR_GAP = -15, //minSeqAge or minSeqLedgerGap conditions not met
+    txMALFORMED = 16                // precondition is invalid
 };
 
 // InnerTransactionResult must be binary compatible with TransactionResult
@@ -1537,6 +1591,8 @@ struct InnerTransactionResult
     case txNOT_SUPPORTED:
     // txFEE_BUMP_INNER_FAILED is not included
     case txBAD_SPONSORSHIP:
+    case txBAD_MIN_SEQ_AGE_OR_GAP:
+    cast txMALFORMED:
         void;
     }
     result;
diff --git a/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x b/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x
index 8f7d5c20..caa41d7f 100644
--- a/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x
+++ b/src/xdr/Stellar-types.x
@@ -14,6 +14,14 @@ typedef int int32;
 typedef unsigned hyper uint64;
 typedef hyper int64;
 
+// An ExtensionPoint is always marshaled as a 32-bit 0 value.  At a
+// later point, it can be replaced by a different union so as to
+// extend a structure.
+union ExtensionPoint switch (int v) {
+case 0:
+     void;
+};
+
 enum CryptoKeyType
 {
     KEY_TYPE_ED25519 = 0,
```

## Design Rationale

Relative timelocks are a known mechanism for simplifying payment
channels, implemented by Bitcoin and used in lightning payment
channels.  Stellar's lack of UTXOs combined with transaction sequence
numbers make payment channels harder to implement.  This proposal
rectifies the problem in a way that is not too hard to implement in
stellar-core and provides a good degree of backwards compatibility.

Fundamentally, a payment channel requires a way to enforce a time
separation between declaring that one wants to execute a pre-signed
transaction T and actually executing T.  Furthermore, between the
declaration and execution, other parties need a chance to object and
invalidate T if there is a later T' superseding T.  The relative
timelock provides this separation, while the relaxing of sequence
numbers makes it easy to object by pre-signing a transaction
invalidating T that can be submitted at a variety of sequence numbers.
Without such a mechanism, multiple auxiliary accounts are required.

An earlier version of the proposal did not contain the
`minSeqLedgerGap` field.  However, members of the payment channel
working group were concerned that the network could, in a worst-case
scenario, experience downtime right after someone incorrectly closes a
payment channel, precluding the other party from correcting the
problem.  `minSeqLedgerGap` guarantees that there will be an
opportunity to correct the problem when the network comes back up,
because the pre-signed transaction with a `minSeqLedgerGap` will still
not be immediately executable.

It's worth asking whether we need `minSeqAge` if we have
`minSeqLedgerGap`.  One reason to keep it is that, under heavy load,
the network could start processing ledgers faster than once every 5
seconds.  This might happen after periods of downtime.

One possible efficiency problem is that transactions with a
`minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap` cannot be pipelined behind other
transactions on the same `sourceAccount`.  Though this might seem to
reduce efficiency, in fact such time-delayed transactions are intended
to be delayed for some "disclosure period" during which the account
remains idle.  Typically such time-delayed transactions are intended
to correct an abnormal situation (e.g., one end of a payment channel
failing, or an account owner losing the key) and so don't actually get
submitted in the common case.

### Two-way payment channel

The proposed mechanism can be used to implement a payment channel
between two parties, an initiator I and a responder R.  The protocol
assumes some _synchrony period_, S, such that both parties are
guaranteed to be able to observe the blockchain state and submit
transactions within any period of length S.

The payment channel consists of a 2-of-2 multisig escrow account E,
initially created and configured by I, and a series of pairs of
_declaration_ and _closing_ transactions on E signed by both parties.
The two parties maintain the following two variables during the
lifetime of the channel:

* s - the _starting sequence number_, is initialized to one greater
  than the sequence number of the escrow account E after E has been
  created and configured.  It is increased only when withdrawing from
  or topping up the escrow account E.

* i - the _iteration number_ of the payment channel, is initialized to
  (s/2)+1.  It is incremented with every off-chain update of the
  payment channel state.

To update the payment channel state, the parties 1) increment i, 2)
sign and exchange a closing transaction C_i, and finally 3) sign and
exchange a declaration transaction D_i.  The transactions are
constructed as follows:

* D_i, the _declaration transaction_, declares an intent to execute
  the corresponding closing transaction C_i.  D_i has source account
  E, sequence number 2i, and `minSeqNum` set to s.  Hence, D_i can
  execute at any time, so long as E's sequence number n satisfies s <=
  n < 2i.  D_i always leaves E's sequence number at 2i after
  executing.  Because C_i has source account E and sequence number
  2i+1, D_i leaves E in a state where C_i can execute.  Note that D_i
  does not require any operations, but since Stellar disallows empty
  transactions, it contains a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation as a no-op.

* C_i, the _closing transaction_, disburses funds to R and changes the
  signing weights on E such that I unilaterally controls E.  C_i has
  source account E, sequence number 2i+1, and a `minSeqAge` of S (the
  synchrony period).  The `minSeqAge` prevents a misbehaving party
  from executing C_i when the channel state has already progressed to
  a later iteration number, as the other party can always invalidate
  C_i by submitting D_i' for some i' > i.  C_i contains one or more
  `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE` operations disbursing funds to R, plus a
  `SET_OPTIONS` operation adjusting signing weights to give I full
  control of E.

For R to top-up or withdraw excess funds from the escrow account E,
the participants skip a generation.  They set s = 2(i+1), and i = i+2.
They then exchange C_i and D_i (which unlike the update case, can be
exchanged in a single phase of communication because D_i is not yet
executable while E's sequence number is below the new s).  Finally,
they create a top-up transaction (on some source account other than E,
in case it fails) that atomically adjusts E's balance and uses
`BUMP_SEQUENCE` to increase E's sequence number to s.

To close the channel cooperatively, the parties re-sign C_i with a
`minSeqNum` of s and a `minSeqAge` of 0, then submit this transaction.

### Two-way payment channel supporting uncoordinated deposits

The proposed mechanism can be used to implement a payment channel
between two parties, an initiator I and a responder R.  The protocol
assumes some _synchrony period_, S, such that both parties are
guaranteed to be able to observe the blockchain state and submit
transactions within any period of length S.

The payment channel consists of two 2-of-2 multisig escrow accounts:

* EI - created and configured by I, holding all amounts contributed by
  I.

* ER - created and configured by R, holding all amounts contributed by
  R.

The payment channel updates state using a series of _declaration_ and
_closing_ transactions with EI as the source account. The two parties
maintain the following two variables during the lifetime of the
channel:

* s - the _starting sequence number_, is initialized to one greater
  than the sequence number of the escrow account EI after EI has been
  created and configured.  It is increased only when withdrawing.

* i - the _iteration number_ of the payment channel, is initialized to
  (s/2)+1.  It is incremented with every off-chain update of the
  payment channel state.

To update the payment channel state, the parties 1) increment i, 2)
sign and exchange a closing transaction C_i, and finally 3) sign and
exchange a declaration transaction D_i.  The transactions are
constructed as follows:

* D_i, the _declaration transaction_, declares an intent to execute
  the corresponding closing transaction C_i.  D_i has source account
  EI, sequence number 2i, and `minSeqNum` set to s.  Hence, D_i can
  execute at any time, so long as EI's sequence number n satisfies s <=
  n < 2i.  D_i always leaves EI's sequence number at 2i after
  executing.  Because C_i has source account EI and sequence number
  2i+1, D_i leaves EI in a state where C_i can execute.  Note that D_i
  does not require any operations, but since Stellar disallows empty
  transactions, it contains a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation as a no-op.

* C_i, the _closing transaction_, disburses funds from EI to ER,
  and/or from ER to EI such that the balances of the escrow accounts
  match the final agreed state of the channel at the time C_i is
  generated. C_i also changes the signing weights on EI and ER such
  that I unilaterally controls EI and R unilaterally controls ER.  C_i
  has source account EI, sequence number 2i+1, and a `minSeqAge` of S
  (the synchrony period).  The `minSeqAge` prevents a misbehaving
  party from executing C_i when the channel state has already
  progressed to a later iteration number, as the other party can
  always invalidate C_i by submitting D_i' for some i' > i.  C_i
  contains one or more `PAYMENT` operations disbursing funds between
  escrow accounts, plus `SET_OPTIONS` operations adjusting signing
  weights of each escrow account.

I and R may top-up their respective escrow accounts by making a
payment into them directly.

I and R may adjust the relative balances of EI and ER as well as
withdraw excess funds from these accounts by skipping a
generation. They set s = 2(i+1), and i = i+2. They then exchange C_i
and D_i (which unlike the update case, can be exchanged in a single
phase of communication because D_i is not yet executable while EI's
sequence number is below the new s).  Finally, they create a withdraw
transaction that atomically shifts funds between EI and ER, withdraws
any desired excess funds with `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE`, and uses
`BUMP_SEQUENCE` to increase EI's sequence number to s.

To close the channel cooperatively, the parties re-sign C_i with a
`minSeqNum` of s and a `minSeqAge` of 0, then submit this transaction.

### One-way payment channel

A one-way payment channel enables an initiator I to make repeated
payments to a recipient R.  Unlike the two-way payment channel, I can
unilaterally set up the payment channel without R's cooperation.
Moreover, R can unilaterally withdraw funds from the payment channel
at any point with no close delay.

The channel consists of a an escrow account E, initially created by I.
Let s be E's sequence number after it has been created and configured.
Define the following transactions with source account E:

* D, the _disclosure transaction_, has sequence number s+1 and a
  vacuous `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation.

* C_i, version i of the _closing transaction_, has sequence number
  s+2.  It disburses funds to R through one or more
  `CREATE_CLAIMABLE_BALANCE` operations, and uses `SET_OPTIONS` to
  increase I's signing weight to 2.  Each C_i disburses more funds to
  R than C_{i-1}.  Only one C_i can execute since they all have the
  same sequence number.

* F, the _fault-recovery transaction_, allows I to recover E in case R
  fails.  It has sequence number s+2, a `minSeqAge` of S (some
  synchrony period), and gives I signing weight 2 on the account.

After adding appropriate trustlines and funding the escrow account E,
I issues a transaction configuring E to have signing threshold 2 (for
low, medium, and high) and to have the following signers all with
weight 1: I, R, D, and F (the latter two as
`SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_PRE_AUTH_TX`).

To submit series of payments, I sends R successive C_i transactions
each of which reflects the cumulative sum of all previous payments.  R
accepts these so long as E has a sufficient balance.  To close the
channel, R submits D and C_i.  If R fails, I can close the channel by
submitting D, waiting S time, and then submitting F.

### Hash Time Locked Contract (HTLC)

HTLCs are a key building block for many blockchain protocols such as
cross-chain atomic swaps and payment channels.  An HTLC is a
transaction _T_ characterized by two values: a hash _h_ and an
expiration time _t_.  Before the expiration time, anyone who knows the
hash preimage of _h_ can execute _T_ in exchange for disclosing that
preimage.  Typically, disclosing the preimage unlocks a different
transaction on the same or a different blockchain.

To make a transaction into an HTLC, the following preconditions should
be set:

* `timeBounds->maxTime` should be set to the expiration time _t_.

* `extraSigners[0]` should be set to a `SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X` with
  the hash value _h_.

Note that the maximum size of a hash pre-image on Stellar is 64
bytes. On Bitcoin, a hash preimage could potentially be up to 520
bytes.  Hence, when pairing Stellar HTLCs with transactions on other
blockchains for cross-chain operation, care must be taken to ensure
that the other blockchain does not accept preimages larger than 64
bytes.  Otherwise, a larger preimage disclosed on another blockchain
would fail to unlock an HTLC on Stellar.

### Key recovery

The owner of account A may wish for a friend with key K to gain access
to A in the event that the owner loses her keys, but not
otherwise. This scenario can be accommodated with pre-authorized
transactions as follows.

Let s be a sequence number much higher than any that will be used in
the future on A (e.g., A's current sequence number plus 2^{32}).  The
owner constructs the following 2 transactions:

* The _recovery transaction_ T_R has source account A, sequence number
  s+1, and `minSeqAge` one week.  It contains a `SET_OPTIONS`
  operation giving K signing weight on A.

* The _declaration transaction_ T_D has source account A, sequence
  number s, and `minSeqNum` 0.  It doesn't need to contain any
  operations, but since Stellar requires at least one operation per
  transaction, it contains a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` as a no-op.

The owner of A signs T_R and T_D, and gives them to the friend for
safe keeping.  If the owner loses her keys, the friend submits T_D,
then a week later submits T_R, and finally uses key K to help the user
recover her funds.

If T_D and K are ever compromised and an attacker unexpectedly submits
T_D, then the user simply submits any transaction on A to consume
sequence number s+1 and invalidate T_R.

### Parallel transaction submission

A farm of 100 servers is constantly submitting transactions on the
same source account, and wishes to coordinate use of sequence numbers.
This can be achieved by having server number N always submit
transactions with sequence numbers congruent to N modulo 100.  Sending
the transaction at s with `minSeqNum` s-99 ensures that if any of the
servers do not submit transactions, the gap will not prevent other
transactions from executing.

### Deterministic account sequence numbers at creation

The proposed `ledgerBounds` field can be used to create an account with
a predictable sequence number that is guaranteed if the account creation
succeeds.

Assuming the user plans to create the account between ledgers 0 and N,
they can specify `ledgerBounds` as 0 and N + 1, and include a
`BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation that bumps the sequence of the created account
to N<<32. The transaction will be guaranteed to only succeed with the
created account having a sequence number of N<<32.

The sequence number is guaranteed because the account is created with a
sequence number derived from the current ledger's sequence number. The
`BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation is a no-op if the account's sequence number is
greater than the `bumpTo` sequence number. The `ledgerBounds` restricts
the creation to occur only up to the `bumpTo` to ensure that creation
results with the account having the determined sequence number.

It is also possible to eliminate the `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operation from the
transaction is a subsequent transaction uses `minSeqNum` with a value
matching the `minLedger` of `ledgerBounds`.

This property makes it possible to setup contracts using pre-authorized
transactions where the pre-authorized transaction has the created
account as its source account.

## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

Previously signed transactions containing time points greater than
2^{63} are no longer valid with this proposal.  However, given that
the number 0 already represents no time bounds, this is unlikely to
cause problems in practice.

The binary XDR of any other previously valid transactions will unmarshal
to a valid transaction under the current proposal.  Obviously legacy
software will not be able to parse transactions with the new
preconditions, however.

### Resource Utilization

Transaction sizes will increase nominally, but only for transactions
that use the new preconditions.

All account ledger entries will increase in size nominally with the
addition of the account extension.

The maximum number of signatures that must be verified for each
transaction will not change.

The introduction of `extraSigners` makes the use of
`SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X` signers more efficient by making them
stateless, moving them from the account signers to the transaction.
For any use cases utilizing this signer this may reduce the number of
ledger entries and reduce the number of transactions since there would
be no transactions to setup a `SIGNER_KEY_TYPE_HASH_X` signer before
its use, and no transactions to remove it after its use.

## Security Concerns

The security concerns stem primarily from new types of transaction
making use of the new features.  As such, the new preconditions,
particularly `minSeqNum`, should make pre-signed transactions less
brittle and simplify protocols.  Nonetheless, there is still a lot of
room for error in protocols.

The fact that `BUMP_SEQUENCE` operations are executed after all
transactions have been validated leads to a counterintuitive situation
in which two operations can execute in the same block although both
may not succeed.  This is because the `BUMP_SEQUENCE` can affect is
the `seqNum` attribute of the `AccountEntry`. This proposal introduces
two new attributes that may be affected, `seqAge` and `seqLedgerGap`.
Changes in any of these fields as an effect of a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` may
cause other transactions that passed validation to fail during apply.

An example of this is if a source account has a valid transaction with
`minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap` and a second transaction, containing
a `BUMP_SEQUENCE` that bumps the sequence of the source account, is
created that is also valid. Any protocol that does this risks both
transactions being accepted as valid in the same ledger. If both
transactions execute in the same ledger and the bump sequence
transaction is executed first, the other transaction will fail as its
`minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap` will no longer be satisfied.

Any protocol that specifies for a source account a transaction with
`minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap`, should not allow another transaction
to be valid at the same moment unless the intent of that other
transaction is to cause the first to fail or become invalid. Any
transaction that is valid in the same moment as a transaction with
`minSeqAge` or `minSeqLedgerGap` can cause the transaction to fail
during execution even if it passed validation. Once the transaction
has failed during execution it cannot be executed again as its
sequence number will have been consumed.

Fortunately, it appears that in most useful protocols time-delayed
"closing" transactions use a NULL `minSeqNum`, while transactions with
non-NULL `minSeqNum` are "disclosure" transactions intended to be
valid at any time.

The design rationale includes several multi-party protocols that
require all parties to sign a transaction for it to be valid.
This section does not discuss all possible security concerns with
these protocols. It is at least worth noting that like most
multi-party protocols there exists a period of time where a
free-option may exist, where one party has authorized a transaction
and another party can wait some period of time to decide if they
also will authorize it, or fallback to some previously valid
transaction.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.
