## Preamble

```
CAP: 0014
Title: Adversarial Transaction Set Ordering
Authors: Jeremy Rubin
Status: Draft
Created: 2018-11-16
Discussion: None
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

As of protocol version 10, orders are sorted in protocol such that  transactions
for an account are sorted by sequence number (ascending) the order between
accounts is randomized. We propose leaving the transactions un-sorted, but
checking that the order satisfies certain properties.

## Abstract


As of protocol version 10, orders are sorted in protocol such that  transactions
for an account are sorted by sequence number (ascending) the order between
accounts is randomized. We propose leaving the transactions un-sorted, but
checking that the order satisfies certain properties. The new properties ensure
that transactions can apply in-order, but permit a malicious nominator to easily
place a specific transaction to occur before another. This is not a change from
current behavior, because a nominator may (with a small number of tries), adjust
the TxSetFrame to place that transaction in front anyways.


## Motivation

The current requirement of a randomized sort is intended to prevent malicious
nominators from front-running a transaction, but it does not achieve that goal
because a nominator may front-run a transaction in small number of trials.

Randomized ordering does, however, neccessitate that the result of a transaction
is tri-valent (succeed, fail, invalid).

If instead, we force the order to be determined by the nominator according to
some rules, this opens the door to them only including transactions which
succeed in a TxSetFrame.

It also, as a side-benefit, reduces the asymptotic latency of validating a ledger
because the ordering must only be _verified_ by each node.




## Specification

In this version we iterate over the TxSet transactions and check that they are
in a valid order with respect to the sequences of each account such that each
transaction can be applied. This implies nominators must propose the exact ordering
validly.

We also eagerly consider BumpSequence operations during this check to ensure
that transactions are also properly linearized with respect to BumpSequence.
This implies that certain types of transaction graphs with two BumpSequences may
be impossible to linearize, however we specify that the ordering of transactions
may change in future ledger versions so this cannot be depended on.

This ensures that the mTransactions are sorted in an order such that the
transactions can all be applied and consume a Sequence number.

We do not check for any other property to allow flexiblity for the nominator to
decide the ordering.

For previous ledger versions we must maintain the old behavior.



## Rationale

Making this adjustment makes it more clear that relying on the randomization of
the transaction set ordering is an anti-pattern because it is insecure; the
order that the nominator selects is arbitary and attacker-controlled.

Checking consistency given BumpSequences fixes an issue which can cause fees to
be paid unexpectedly with a contract written to use bump sequence.



## Backwards Compatibility

The old sorting algorithm for `sortForApply` and `sortForHash` must remain for
ledgers with earlier versions.

Nominators wishing to propose a TxSet in a valid order may simply call
sortForApply with a salt of their choice to generate a valid ordering, and then
run through the transactions to eliminate any transactions which break the
BumpSequence linearization invariant. There is no requirement that this is the
order though, any valid order suffices.

## Forwards Compatibility

In new versions, we may want to enforce stricter rules on the order of transactions.

The arbitary ordering at the nominator layer makes it easy for futures changes
to further constrict the behavior, e.g., enforcing that the ordering must be
such that no transaction fails in the ledger, enforcing that the ordering is
grouped by account, etc.

Such changes are then something that downstream software must already be _able_
to handle witout surprise.

It's possible that CAP-0014 does not specify a forwards compatible set of rules,
in which case the rule should be incompatibly updated. Because we specify that
the linearization properties shall *not* be relied on for future ledger
versions, this does not break expectations but may require rewriting software
designs.

If there is a need for other orders for compact lookup proofs for light clients,
the commitments should be generated and verified separately from the base
ordering.


## Implementation

None yet.
