## Preamble

```
CAP: 0046-02 (formerly 0047)
Title: Smart Contract Lifecycle
Working Group:
    Owner: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>
    Authors: Siddharth Suresh <@sisuresh>, Dmytro Kozhevin <@dmkozh>
    Consulted: Graydon Hoare <@graydon>, Jon Jove <@jonjove>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, Nicolas Barry <@MonsieurNicolas>
Status: Draft
Created: 2022-05-02
Discussion:
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

This proposal defines the structure of smart contracts on Stellar and specifies
how users can create them.

## Motivation and Goals Alignment

See the Soroban overview CAP.

## Abstract

Users need a way to manage smart contracts on the network. This CAP allows users
to deploy the smart contracts to the network and specifies the supported
contract code kinds.

This CAP also lets the validators turn off all smart contract functionality if
some unexpected behavior is found in the protocol.

## Specification

### XDR

See the XDR diffs in the Soroban overview CAP, specifically those referring to
`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT` and
`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_INSTALL_CONTRACT_CODE`.

## Semantics

### Contract structure

This defines the terms we use in the following sections without going into their
design and implementation details.

#### Contract source

Contract source can be thought of as a 'class' of a contract. Multiple contracts
can share the same source, but have their own state. Thanks to that sharing
capability, we can reduce the amount of duplication in ledger and only store
unique contract sources.

This CAP defines two possible kinds of contract sources:

- WASM source: a blob of WASM code that is stored in a separate ledger entry and
  is deduplicated based on contents. This is installed to ledger by the users.
- Built-in contract: this is a 'source' compiled into host directly that has a
  protocol-defined interface and behavior.

#### Contract instance

Contract instance can be thought of as an instance of the contract 'class'.
Contract instance consists of:

- Identifier: SHA-256 hash of a pre-image payload
- Source reference: a pointer to the WASM source or a tag of a built-in
  contract

A contract instance may own an arbitrary amount of ledger entries attributed to
its identifier. Contracts that share the same source in no way may influence
each other; from the perspective of a contract invoker there is no difference
between calling the contracts with the same or different source references
(besides the possible contract-defined behavior differences).

### Contract identifier preimage types

This CAP defines the following supported contract identifier preimage kinds. The
use cases for every identifier type are described in the following sections.
Every preimage is a part of the `HashIDPreimage` union and has a unique tag
associated with it in order to ensure that there are no collisions with other
hashes in the protocol.

- `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ED25519`: built from an `ed25519` public key
  and the user-specified `uint256` salt.
- `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_SOURCE_ACCOUNT`: built from a Stellar account
  identifier and the user-specified `uint256` salt.
- `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ASSET`: built from a Stellar `Asset`
  structure.
- `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_CONTRACT`: built from another contract
  identifier and contract-specified `uint256` salt.

Every preimage must also include a `networkID` (a hash of the network
passphrase) which ensures that every network has unique set of contract
identifiers.

### Installing WASM sources using `InvokeHostFunctionOp`

WASM contract sources can be installed to the network without instantiating a
contract via `InvokeHostFunctionOp`(defined in [CAP-0046-04](./cap-0046-04.md))
with `HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_INSTALL_CONTRACT_CODE` host function type.

This function accepts `InstallContractCodeArgs` struct that contains the WASM
contract code.

Installed contracts are stored in `ContractCodeEntry` ledger entries. These
entries are keyed by the hash of `InstallContractCodeArgs` used to install
them.

Contract installation host function will compute the hash of
`InstallContractCodeArgs` and check if such a contract code already exists. If
the entry exists, the operation will immediately succeed. If it doesn't, the
new `ContractCodeEntry` will be created.

Host does not perform any validation on the installed contract code, besides
checking its size.

#### Max contract size setting

The maximum WASM contract size will be introduced as a `ConfigSettingEntry`(see
[CAP-0046-09](./cap-0046-09.md) for details on config entries). 

It is set during the protocol version upgrade using a new `ConfigSettingEntry`,
with `configSettingID` == `CONFIG_SETTING_CONTRACT_MAX_SIZE_BYTES`, and
`contractMaxSizeBytes` == `16384`. The valid values for
`contractMaxSizeBytes` are[0, 256000] (inclusive).

#### No contract-driven WASM installation

This CAP does not specify a way to install WASM sources from within a
contract. 

This is done to encourage efficient code reuse and deduplication: if the
contract was allowed to install the WASM code, then we'd need to store it
twice (in the installer contract and in the source entry).

### Instantiating contracts using `InvokeHostFunctionOp`

Contracts can be instantiated via `InvokeHostFunctionOp` with
`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT` host function type.

The function accepts `CreateContractArgs` struct that defines the input for
building the contract identifier preimage (`contractID` field) and the contract
source reference (`source` field).

All the preimage types besides `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_CONTRACT` can be
built from the `contractID` field.

The source and identifier arguments are normally independent of each other with
an exception: identifiers that are built from `CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ASSET` may only
be used in conjunction with built-in token contract source. This handles the
special case of instantiating token contracts corresponding to the classic
Stellar assets (see more details in [CAP-0046-06](./CAP-0046-06.md)).

The host builds the actual contract identifier by computing SHA-256 of the
`HashIDPreimage` corresponding to the `contractID`. If the contract identifier
already exists, the operation fails.

If the identifier is new, the host will a new `ContractDataEntry` from
[CAP-0046-05](./CAP-0046-05.md) with a `SCV_STATIC` key type, and
`SCS_LEDGER_KEY_CONTRACT_CODE` key value. The value of the entry is
`SCContractCode` that either refers to the WASM code entry or to a built-in
contract (according to the value of `source` field in `CreateContractArgs`).

#### ED25519-based contract identifiers

Building a `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_ED25519` preimage based on a public
ED25519 key has an a additional signature verification step as to make sure
that this key has authorized creating a contract on their behalf.

The owner of the key must sign SHA-256 hash of `HashIDPreimage` of type
`ENVELOPE_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT_ARGS`, that includes the network id, `salt`, and
`CreateContractSource` args that must match the respective args of
`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_CREATE_CONTRACT` invocation.

#### Installation fused with instantiation

One of the possible types of `CreateContractSource` is
`CONTRACT_SOURCE_INSTALLED`, that accepts `InstallContractCodeArgs`. This is a
convenience argument that allows to install the code and instantiate a contract
using that code in a single operation.

The installation implementation is exactly the same as for the case when
`HOST_FUNCTION_TYPE_INSTALL_CONTRACT_CODE` function is called. The contract
will be instantiated with WASM code reference source type that points to the
hash of the newly installed contract.

As mentioned in the installation section, if the contract code already exists in
the ledger, the operation will still succeed, but no code entry will be
created.

### Instantiating a contract from a contract

Factory contracts are quite popular already on other networks, so this CAP adds
functionality to support them. 

The following host functions are provided to instantiate contracts:

```rust
// Instantiates a contract with the source referring to the provided wasm_hash.
fn create_contract_from_contract(wasm_hash: Object /* 32-bytes array */,
                                 salt: Object /* 32-bytes array */) -> Object /* 32-bytes array */
// Instantiates a contract with the source referring to the built-in token.
fn create_token_from_contract(salt: Object /* 32-bytes array */) -> Object /* 32-bytes array */
```

All of these functions return the identifier of the newly created contract.

The identifier of the created contract is generated by hashing the
`HashIDPreimage` with type `ENVELOPE_TYPE_CONTRACT_ID_FROM_CONTRACT` with the
salt provided by the host function call.

### Validator override

This proposal adds two new `LedgerHeader` flags that can disable the create and
invoke contract operations using upgrades. The validators can use this
mechanism in case unexpected behaviour is seen. We also considered adding a
mechanism for validators to opt accounts into smart contracts to allow for
a "soft" launch, but the implementation changes to get this to work are not
simple. The validators have the `LedgerHeader` overrides to fall back on, so
it's not clear that the complexity of adding a "soft" launch mechanism is worth
it.

## Design Rationale

### There are no built in controls for contracts

Controls like pausing invocation or mutability for all or a subset of a contract
should be put into a contract itself. Leaving it to the contract writer is a
much more general solution than baking it into the protocol. The downside is
this is more error prone and will take more space since the same logic will be
implemented multiple times.

### `ContractDataEntry` has no owner associated with it

The entity that creates the `ContractDataEntry` that contains the contract code
is not tied to it in any way. This allows for contract management and
authorization to be handled in the contract using whichever custom mechanism
the contract creator chooses.

### `ContractCodeEntry` has no owner associated with it

Contract source code entries with the WASM code don't have any ownership. Anyone
can install contract sources to the ledger and then anyone can use them. This
encourages sharing the contract code and allows contracts that use it to be
sure that their implementation can't unexpectedly change.

### Contracts cannot be updated and deleted

The contract code reference is stored in a `ContractDataEntry`, but contract
code cannot be updated or deleted in the initial version. The host functions in
[CAP-0046-05](./CAP-0046-05#host-function-additions) to update or delete
`ContractDataEntry` should trap if they are used on contract code.

### Malicious contracts

The validators do not have a mechanism to ban specific contracts. Any kind of
targeted banning mechanism can be worked around quite easily by creating new
accounts and contracts.

### Maximum WASM contract code size is configurable

The maximum contract size will be set during the protocol upgrade, and can be
updated by the validators. This allows to adjust the contract sizes depending
on the demand and network load requirements.

### ContractIDs are deterministic

Pulling contractIDs from `LedgerHeader.idPool` would be easier but it would make
parallelizing contract creation more difficult in the future. It's also more
difficult to determine what the contractID will be since the id pool would be
used by offers and other contracts. This CAP uses a `Hash` instead as the
contractID. 

With this CAP we provide several ways of building the contractID preimages that
can be reproduced off-chain and then used to address the contracts that may or
may not exist (for example, some general contracts like tokens or AMMs).

## Security Concerns

The security concerns from CAP-0046
(https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/core/cap-0046.md#security-concerns)
apply here as well.

In addition to those concerns, this CAP does not provide validators with much
control over contracts on the network. The only mechanism they have is blocking
all contract creations and invocations, which should only be used in drastic
situations. This CAP does not define a way for validators to block specific
contracts.

## Potential Future Work

### Mutable contracts support

While the contracts are immutable in this CAP, it's already possible to make
them 'mutable' via proxy contracts (for example, contract A forwards its
method calls to contract B and ID of contract B is stored in the data of
the contract A).

To further support mutation via the proxy pattern we could do the following:

- Allow contract to modify its `SCS_LEDGER_KEY_CONTRACT_CODE` entry (as the
  modification can only happen from within the contract, this would need to be
  implemented in the first installed version of the contract)
- Allow specifying a contract ID as the contract's source reference, so that the
  contract would be guaranteed to have exactly the same implementation as the
  referred contract without any additional code.
