```
CAP: 0046-04 (formerly 0052)
Title: Smart Contract Interactions (Minimal)
Working Group:
    Owner: Jonathan Jove <@jonjove>
    Authors:
    Consulted: Nicolas Barry <@monsieurnicolas>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, Tomer Weller <@tomerweller>
Status: Rejected
Created: 2022-05-20
Discussion: TBD
Protocol version: TBD
```

## Simple Summary

Implement a minimal way to interact with smart contracts.

## Motivation

Many contracts need to determine when an agent is authorized to take a
particular action. When the agent is external (such as a person or legal
entity), a contract typically makes such a determination by verifying one or
more digital signatures. When the agent is itself a contract, a contract
typically assumes that the contract can take any action permitted by its code.

In Ethereum, many contracts unify this determination by relying on `msg.sender`
(for more information on this approach, see CAP-0050). Unifying this
determination means providing some notion of authorization in the protocol
itself. Unfortunately, there are many reasonable authorization mechanisms with
various advantages and disadvantages in the context of Stellar. In order to
avoid choosing between these reasonable mechanisms and the consequence costs
and risks associated with making a suboptimal choice, this proposal supports
the minimal set of functionality that contracts would rely on to implement their
own authorization.

### Goals Alignment

This CAP is aligned with the following Stellar Network Goals:

- The Stellar Network should make it easy for developers of Stellar projects to
  create highly usable products

## Abstract

This proposal introduces `InvokeHostFunctionOp` which permit interacting with
contracts. Furthermore, new host functions to facilitate authorization are
introduced. To facilitate account based authorization, host functions are
introduced to read account thresholds and signers. To facilitate authorization
of contracts, the `get_invoking_contract` host function is introduced. The
proposal implies that contracts will rely heavily on presigned messages,
although this proposal does not recommend any standards for their safe usage.

## Specification

### XDR Changes

See the XDR diffs in the Soroban overview CAP, specifically those covering
new transaction operations to invoke host functions.

### Semantics

#### No Changes to Overlay or Transaction Queue

This proposal doesn't introduce any new transaction envelope types, so all
downstream concepts such as overlay messages and transaction queue work without
modification.

#### External Interaction with a Smart Contract

To interact with a contract, a user will submit a `TransactionEnvelope env`
with the following properties:

- `env.tx.seqNum = seqNum(env.tx.sourceAccount) + 1`
- `availableBalance(env.tx.sourceAccount) >= env.tx.fee`
- `env.tx.operations.len() == 1`
- `env.signatures` are valid signatures for signers of `env.tx.sourceAccount`
with total weight exceeding `lowThreshold(env.tx.sourceAccount)`

`op = env.tx.operations[0].body.invokeHostFunctionOp()` will have the following
properties:

- `op.function` is `HOST_FN_CALL`
- `op.parameters` is a vector containing
`(contractID: SCO_BINARY, symbol: SCO_BINARY, parameters: SCO_VECTOR)`
- `op.footprint` contains at least the data that will be read or written

Because the operation `sourceAccount` is ignored, we also require
`env.tx.operations[0].sourceAccount` is null.

#### Authorization

To check whether an agent is authorized to take a specified action, a contract
can use the
[cryptographic](./CAP-0046-03.md#cryptographic-operations) and
[account](./CAP-0046-03.md#account-host-functions) host functions specified in
CAP-0046-03.

While `verify_sig_ed25519` can be implemented in a contract, there will be
significant performance improvements from including such a fundamental operation
as a host function.

#### Cross-Contract Calls

[CAP-0046-03](./CAP-0046-03.md#invoking-another-function) specifies the host
functions you can use to do cross-contract invocations.

## Design Rationale

This is the minimal possible design for interacting with smart contracts. The
only protocol primitive for authorization is `get_invoking_contract`, which must
be provided because contracts cannot sign for themselves.

### Avoiding Confused Deputy Problems

Relying on the decorated signatures of the transaction envelope for
authorization of the source account can cause confused deputy problems. For
example, a server might be given access to a private key in order to pay the
fee for user transactions. If a contract relied on those same signatures, then
a malicious user could trick the server by submitting a transaction that invokes
a contract in the name of the server's key. The server could then unknowingly
authorize a contract invocation when it meant to authorize the payment of fees.

To avoid this problem, contracts must not have access to the transaction source
account or decorated signatures. Given this restriction, it is always safe to
pay the fees for a contract invocation.

### Transaction Sequence Number Doesn't Provide Replay Prevention

Because the contract doesn't have access to the source account (see "Avoiding
Confused Deputy Problems"), the sequence number cannot be used to provide replay
prevention. For this reason, contracts are not given access to the transaction
sequence number.

### No Function To Check Account Signatures

Instead of providing a host function to check account signatures, we provide a
host function to get the weight of a signer. This is a more flexible interface
that allows contracts to filter or transform the signers.


## Protocol Upgrade Transition

### Backwards Incompatibilities

This proposal is completely backwards compatible.

### Resource Utilization

This proposal separates transaction signatures from contract signatures. In
general, this is likely to increase the number of signatures which must be
verified.

## Test Cases

None yet.

## Implementation

None yet.
