## Preamble

```
SEP: 0012
Title: Anchor/Client customer info transfer
Author: Interstellar
Status: Active
Created: 2018-09-11
Updated: 2021-04-13
Version 1.5.0
Dependencies: SEP-9
```

## Abstract

This SEP defines a standard way for stellar clients to upload KYC (or other) information to anchors and other services. [SEP-6](sep-0006.md) and [SEP-31](sep-0031.md) use this protocol, but it can serve as a stand-alone service as well.

This SEP was made with these goals in mind:

* interoperability
* Allow a customer to enter their KYC information to their wallet once and use it across many services without re-entering information manually
* handle the most common 80% of use cases
* handle image and binary data
* support the set of fields defined in [SEP-9](sep-0009.md)
* support authentication via [SEP-10](sep-0010.md)
* support the provision of data for [SEP-6](sep-0006.md), [SEP-24](sep-0024.md), [SEP-31](sep-0031.md), and others
* give customers control over their data by supporting complete data erasure

To support this protocol an anchor acts as a server and implements the specified REST API endpoints, while a wallet implements a client that consumes the API. The goal is interoperability, so a wallet implements a single client according to the protocol, and will be able to interact with any compliant anchor. Similarly, an anchor that implements the API endpoints according to the protocol will work with any compliant wallet.

## Prerequisites

* An anchor must define the location of their `KYC_SERVER` or `TRANSFER_SERVER` in their [`stellar.toml`](sep-0001.md). This is how a client app knows where to find the anchor's server. A client app will send KYC requests to the `KYC_SERVER` if it is specified, otherwise to the `TRANSFER_SERVER`.
* Anchors and clients must support [SEP-10](sep-0010.md) web authentication and use it for all SEP-12 endpoints.

## API Endpoints

* [`GET /customer`](#customer-get): Check the status of a customers info
* [`PUT /customer`](#customer-put): Idempotent upload of customer info
* [`DELETE /customer/[account]`](#customer-delete): Deletion of customer info
* [`PUT /customer/callback`](#customer-callback-put): Set a callback for a wallet to receive status updates from the anchor
* [`POST /customer/files`](#customer-files)
* [`GET /customer/files`](#get-request)

## Authentication

Clients should submit the JWT previously obtained from the anchor via the [SEP-10](sep-0010.md) authentication flow. The JWT should be included in all requests as request header:
```
Authorization: Bearer <JWT>
```

Alternatively, if the client cannot add the authorization header. The JWT should be passed as a jwt query parameter:
```
?jwt=<token>
```

## Content Type

All endpoints accept in requests the following `Content-Type`s:

- `multipart/form-data`
- `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`
- `application/json`

`multipart/form-data` should be used for requests including binary data type values from [SEP-9](sep-0009.md). Any of the above encoding schemes may be used when requests do not include binary data.

All endpoints respond with content type:

- `application/json`

## Customer GET

This endpoint allows clients to:

1. Fetch the fields the server requires in order to register a new customer via a `PUT /customer` request

 If the server does not have a customer registered for the parameters sent in the request, it should return the fields required in the response. The same response should be returned when no parameters are sent.

2. Check the status of a customer that may already be registered
   
 This allows clients to check whether the customers information was accepted, rejected, or still needs more info. If the server still needs more info, or the server needs updated information, it should return the fields required.

### Request

```
GET [KYC_SERVER]/customer
GET [KYC_SERVER]/customer?account=<public-key>&memo=<memo>&memo_type=<memo-type>&type=<customer-type>
GET [KYC_SERVER]/customer?id=<customer-id>
```

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | `string` | (optional) The ID of the customer as returned in the response of a previous `PUT` request. If the customer has not been registered, they do not yet have an `id`.
`account` | `G...` string | (optional) The Stellar account ID used to identify this customer. If many customers share the same Stellar account, the `memo` and `memo_type` parameters should be included as well.
`memo` | string | (optional) a [properly formatted memo](https://developers.stellar.org/docs/glossary/transactions/#memo) that uniquely identifies a customer. This value is generated by the client making the request. This parameter and `memo_type` are identical to the `PUT` request parameters of the same name.
`memo_type` | string | (optional) type of `memo`. One of `text`, `id` or `hash`. If `hash`, `memo` should be base64-encoded.
`type` | string | (optional) the type of action the customer is being KYCd for.  See the [Type Specification](#type-specification) below.
`lang` | string | (optional) Defaults to `en`.  Language code specified using [ISO 639-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1).  Human readable descriptions, choices, and messages should be in this language.

#### ID vs. Account & Memo

The client can always use the `account`, `memo`, and `memo_type` parameters to uniquely identify a customer. However, if a `PUT /customer` request has already been made for the customer, the client may use the `id` returned in the response instead.

#### Type Specification

Different types of customers may have different KYC requirements depending on the action a given customer wants to take. The `type` parameter is used to specify the action a customer wants to make so the server can identify what information must be collected. SEP-12 does not define what `type` values are accepted and instead leaves that to the other protocols, such as [SEP-6](sep-0006.md) and [SEP-31](sep-0031.md), that use SEP-12 for the actions associated with those protocols.

For example, if a customer is being KYC'd as a SEP-31 sender, they may only require full name and email, but a SEP-31 receiver would require banking information in order to receive a direct deposit. The `type` parameter could also be used to indicate that a customer is an organization instead of a person. 

If the implementor requires the same set of fields for all customers, there is no need for the `type` parameter.

### Response

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | string | (optional) ID of the customer, if the customer has already been created via a `PUT /customer` request.
`status` | string | Status of the customers KYC process.
`fields` | object | (optional) An object containing the fields still needed to finish KYC Process for the given KYC type.
`message` | string | (optional) Human readable message describing the current state of customer's KYC process.

```js
// The case when a customer has been successfully KYC'd and approved
{
   "id": "d1ce2f48-3ff1-495d-9240-7a50d806cfed",
   "status": "ACCEPTED",
}
```

```js
// The case when an anchor requires info about an unknown customer 
{
   "status": "NEEDS_INFO",
   "fields": {
      "email_address": {
         "description": "Email address of the customer",
         "type": "string"
         "optional": true
      },
      "id_type": {
         "description": "Government issued ID",
         "type": "string",
         "choices": [
            "Passport",
            "Drivers License",
            "State ID"
         ]
      },
      "photo_id_front": {
         "description": "A clear photo of the front of the government issued ID",
         "type": "binary"
      }
   }
}
```

```js
// The case when an anchor needs an existing customer's email to be updated
{
   "id": "d1ce2f48-3ff1-495d-9240-7a50d806cfed",
   "status": "NEEDS_INFO",
   "fields": {
      "email_address": {
         "description": "Email address of the customer",
         "type": "string"
      }
   }
}
```

```js
// The case when the Anchor is processing KYC information  
{
    "id": "46116754-695e-43f6-84c4-8c05e50a7b12",
    "status": "PROCESSING",
    "message": "Photo ID requires manual review. This process typically takes 1-2 business days."
}
```

```js
// The case when a customer has been rejected and cannot be KYC'd
{
   "id": "d1ce2f48-3ff1-495d-9240-7a50d806cfed",
   "status": "REJECTED",
   "message": "This person is on a sanctions list"
}
```

#### Status

Status | Description
-------|------------
ACCEPTED | KYC has been accepted and the customer can be identified by stellar account and optional memo in future transactions.  It is possible for an accepted customer to move back to another status if the KYC provider determines it needs more info at a later date, or if the customer shows up on a sanctions list.
PROCESSING | KYC process is in flight and client can check again in the future to see if any further info is needed
NEEDS_INFO | More info needs to be provided to finish KYC for this customer.  The `fields` entry is required in this case.
REJECTED | This customer's KYC has failed and will never succeed.  The `message` must be supplied in this case.

#### Fields

The fields entry is required for the `NEEDS_INFO` status.  Fields should be specified as an object with keys representing field names required, preferably from SEP-9.

Property | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`type` | enum | The data type of the field value. Can be `string`, `binary`, `number`, or `date`
`description` | string | A human-readable description of this field, especially important if this is not a SEP-9 field.
`choices` | array | (optional) An array of valid values for this field.
`optional` | boolean | (optional) A boolean whether this field is required to proceed or not. Defaults to false.

#### Errors

For requests containing an `id` parameter value that does not exist or exists for a customer created by another anchor, return a `404` response.
```json
{
   "error": "customer not found for id: 7e285e7d-d984-412c-97bc-909d0e399fbf"
}
```

For invalid requests, return a `400` response describing the issue.
For example:

```json
{
   "error": "unrecognized 'type' value. see valid values in the /info response"
}
```

## Customer PUT

Upload customer information to an anchor in an authenticated and idempotent fashion.

```
PUT [KYC_SERVER || TRANSFER_SERVER]/customer
```

### Request

```
Content-Type: multipart/form-data;boundary="boundary"

--boundary
Content-Disposition: form-data; name="account"

GBORFR3GDNVZ5PLUTBDQHKGWVD26CQUHORO2T3SDQ2JPLGLUJCCA5GK6
--boundary
Content-Disposition: form-data; name="memo"

21bf91a4-7db1-401d-8108-fab7660a45d6 
--boundary
Content-Disposition: form-data; name="memo_type"

text
--boundary--
```

```
Content-Type: application/x-www-form-urlencoded

account=GBORFR3GDNVZ5PLUTBDQHKGWVD26CQUHORO2T3SDQ2JPLGLUJCCA5GK6&memo=21bf91a4-7db1-401d-8108-fab7660a45d6&memo_type=text&type=sep31-sender
```

```
Content-Type: application/json

{
   "account":"GBORFR3GDNVZ5PLUTBDQHKGWVD26CQUHORO2T3SDQ2JPLGLUJCCA5GK6",
   "memo":"21bf91a4-7db1-401d-8108-fab7660a45d6",
   "memo_type":"text",
   "type": "counterparty_organization"
}
```

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | string | (optional) The `id` value returned from a previous call to this endpoint. If specified, no other parameter is required.
`account` | `G...` string | (optional) The Stellar account ID to upload KYC data for. If specified, `id` should not be specified.
`memo` | string | (optional) Uniquely identifies individual customers in schemes where multiple customers share one Stellar address (ex. [SEP-31](sep-0031.md)). If included, the KYC data will only apply to all requests that include this `memo`.
`memo_type` | string | (optional) type of `memo`. One of `text`, `id` or `hash`.
`type` | string | (optional) The type of the customer as defined in the [Type Specification](#type-specification).

The wallet should also transmit one or more of the fields listed in [SEP-9](./sep-0009.md), depending on what the anchor has indicated it needs.

When uploading data for fields specificed in [SEP-9](./sep-0009.md), `binary` type fields (typically files) should be submitted **after all other fields**. The reason for this is that some web servers require `binary` fields at the end so that they know when they can begin processing the request as a stream.

### Response

If the anchor received and stored the data successfully, it should respond with a `202 Accepted` HTTP status code and a response body containing the customer ID.

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | `string` | An identifier for the updated or created customer

```json
{
   "id": "391fb415-c223-4608-b2f5-dd1e91e3a986"
}
```

This ID can be used in future requests to retrieve the status of the customer or update the customer's information. It may also be used in other SEPs to identify the customer.

Anchors should return `404 Not Found` for requests including an `id` value that does not exist in the database. Anchors should also return `404` when the `id` specified in the request was initially used to create a customer for a different stellar account.
```json
{
   "error":  "customer with `id` not found"
}
```

All error responses should contain details under the `error` key.
For example:

```json
{
   "error": "'photo_id_front' cannot be decoded. Must be jpg or png."
}
```

## Customer DELETE

Delete all personal information that the anchor has stored about a given customer. `[account]` is the Stellar account ID (`G...`) of the customer to delete. This request must be authenticated (via [SEP-10](sep-0010.md)) as coming from the owner of the account that will be deleted. If `account` does not uniquely identify an individual customer (a shared account), the client should include the `memo` and `memo_type` fields in the request body.

### Request

```
DELETE [KYC_SERVER || TRANSFER_SERVER]/customer/[account]
```

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`memo` | `string` | (optional) The memo used to create the customer record
`memo_type` | `string` | (optional) The type of memo used to create the customer record

### DELETE Responses

Situation | Response
----------|---------
Success | `200 OK`
Client not authenticated properly | `401 Unauthorized`
Anchor has no information on the customer | `404 Not Found`

## Customer callback PUT

Allow the wallet to provide a callback URL to the anchor. The provided callback URL will replace (and supercede) any previously-set callback URL for this account.

Whenever the user's `status` field changes, the anchor will issue a POST request to the callback URL. The payload of the POST request will be the same as [`GET /customer`](#customer-get).

It's the wallet's responsibility to send a working callback URL to the anchor.

Anchors will submit POST requests until the user's status changes to `ACCEPTED` or `REJECTED`. If a wallet needs to watch a user's KYC status after that, it will need to set a callback again.

### Request

```
PUT [KYC_SERVER || TRANSFER_SERVER]/customer/callback
```

| Name                 | Type     | Description             |
| -------------------- | -------- | ----------------------- |
| `id`        | `string`      | (optional) The ID of the customer as returned in the response of a previous `PUT` request. If the customer has not been registered, they do not yet have an `id`.                                                                                                                                     |
| `account`   | `G...` string | (optional) The Stellar account ID used to identify this customer. If many customers share the same Stellar account, the `memo` and `memo_type` parameters should be included as well.                                                                                                                 |
`memo` | `string` | (optional) The memo used to create the customer record |
`memo_type` | `string` | (optional) The type of memo used to create the customer record |
| `url` | `string` | A callback URL that the SEP-12 server will POST to when the state of the account changes. |

### PUT Responses

| Situation                                 | Response           |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------------------ |
| Success                                   | `200 OK`           |
| Client not authenticated properly         | `401 Unauthorized` |
| Anchor has no information on the customer | `404 Not Found`    |

## Customer Files

Passing binary fields such as `photo_id_front` or `organization.photo_proof_address` in [PUT /customer](#customer-put) requests must be done using the `multipart/form-data` content type. This is acceptable in most cases, but `multipart/form-data` does not support nested data structures such as arrays or sub-objects.

This endpoint is intended to decouple requests containing binary fields from requests containing nested data structures, supported by content types such as `application/json`. This endpoint is optional and only needs to be supported if your use case requires accepting nested data structures in `PUT /customer` requests.

Once a file has been uploaded using this endpoint, it's `file_id` can be used in subsequent `PUT /customer` requests. The field name for the `file_id` should be the appropriate [SEP-9](sep-0009.md) field followed by `_file_id`. For example, if `file_abc` is returned as a `file_id` from [POST /customer/files](post-request), it can be used in a `PUT /customer` request like so:

```json
{
   "account":"GBORFR3GDNVZ5PLUTBDQHKGWVD26CQUHORO2T3SDQ2JPLGLUJCCA5GK6",
   "memo":"21bf91a4-7db1-401d-8108-fab7660a45d6",
   "memo_type":"text",
   "photo_id_front_file_id": "file_abc"
}
```

```json
{
   "id": "2f417dab-18d2-4081-8c59-c9d3afb59d3f",
   "photo_id_front_file_id": "file_abc"
}
```

### POST Request

```
POST [KYC_SERVER || TRANSFER_SERVER]/customer/files
```

Name                 | Type     | Description            
-------------------- | -------- | ----------------------
`file` | binary | A file to upload. The file should follow the specifications of [RFC 2388](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2388) (which defines file transfers for the `multipart/form-data` protocol).

### POST Response

Name                 | Type     | Description            
-------------------- | -------- | ----------------------
`file_id` | string | Unique identifier for the object.
`content_type` | string | The `Content-Type` of the file.
`size` | integer | The size in bytes of the file object.
`expires_at` | [UTC ISO 8601](https://www.iso.org/iso-8601-date-and-time-format.html) string | (optional) The date and time the file will be discarded by the server if not referenced by the client in a `PUT /customer` request.
`customer_id` | string | (optional) The id of the customer this file is associated with. If the customer record does not yet exist this will be `null`.

```json
{
  "file_id": "file_d3d54529-6683-4341-9b66-4ac7d7504238",
  "content_type": "image/jpeg",
  "size": 4089371,
  "customer_id": "2bf95490-db23-442d-a1bd-c6fd5efb584e",
}
```

#### File Size Limits

A [413 Payload Too Large](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Status/413) error should be returned when a file exceeds the server's limit, defined by the implementor. A reasonable size limit is 10MB, as most smartphone photos are around 3MB.

All other error responses should use the `400 Bad Request` status and contain details under the `error` key.

```json
{
   "error": "'photo_id_front' cannot be decoded. Must be jpg or png."
}
```

### GET Request

```
GET [KYC_SERVER || TRANSFER_SERVER]/customer/files
```

One of the following parameters is required.

Name                 | Type     | Description            
-------------------- | -------- | ----------------------
`file_id` | string | (optional) The `file_id` returned from a previous [POST /customer/files](#customer-files) request. The response's `files` list will contain a single object if this parameter is used.
`customer_id` | string | (optional) The `id` returned from a previous [PUT /customer](#customer-put) request. The response should include all files uploaded for the specified customer.

### GET Response

Name                 | Type     | Description            
-------------------- | -------- | ----------------------
`files` | array | A list file objects as described in the [POST /customer/files](#post-response) response.

```json
{
  "files": [
    {
      "file_id": "file_d5c67b4c-173c-428c-baab-944f4b89a57f",
      "content_type": "image/png",
      "size": 6134063,
      "customer_id": "2bf95490-db23-442d-a1bd-c6fd5efb584e"
    },
    {
      "file_id": "file_d3d54529-6683-4341-9b66-4ac7d7504238",
      "content_type": "image/jpeg",
      "size": 4089371,
      "customer_id": "2bf95490-db23-442d-a1bd-c6fd5efb584e"
    }
  ]
}
```

All responses should return `200 OK`. If no files are found for the identifer used, an empty list should be returned.

```json
{
  "files": []
}
```
