## Preamble

```
SEP: 0003
Title: Compliance protocol
Author: stellar.org
Status: Deprecated
Created: 2017-10-30
Updated: 2019-10-04
Version 1.0.1
```

## Deprecation Notice

For most use cases, we actually recommend the workflow specified in [SEP-0024](sep-0024.md) instead of SEP-0003 

## Simple Summary
Complying with Anti-Money Laundering (AML) laws requires financial institutions (FIs) to know not only who their customers are sending money to but who their customers are receiving money from. In some jurisdictions banks are able to trust the AML procedures of other licensed banks. In other jurisdictions each bank must do its own sanction checking of both the sender and the receiver. The Compliance Protocol handles all these scenarios.

## Abstract

The Compliance Protocol is an additional step after federation. In this step the sending FI contacts the receiving FI to get permission to send the transaction. To do this the receiving FI creates an `AUTH_SERVER` and adds an `AUTH_SERVER` entry to its [`stellar.toml`](sep-0001.md).

[SEP-9](sep-0009.md) specifies standard customer information fields that are exchanged between FIs via the Compliance Protocol. The most common fields are:

* First name
* Last name
* Date of birth
* Physical address

## Specification

To send transaction data to the receiving organization, send HTTP POST to `AUTH_SERVER` with `Content-Type` equal `application/x-www-form-urlencoded` and the following body:
```
data=<data value>&sig=<sig value>
```

`data` is a block of JSON that contains the following fields:

Name | Data Type | Description
-----|-----------|------------
`sender` | string | The payment address of the customer that is initiating the send. Ex. `bob*bank.com`
`need_info` | boolean | If the caller needs the recipient's AML info in order to send the payment.
`tx` | string: base64 encoded [xdr.Transaction](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-core/blob/4961b8bb4a64c68838632c5865389867e9f02840/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x#L297-L322) | The transaction that the sender would like to send in XDR format. This transaction is unsigned and it's sequence number should be equal `0`.
`attachment` | string | The full text of the attachment. The hash of this attachment is included as a memo in the transaction. The **attachment** field follows the [Stellar Attachment Convention](https://www.stellar.org/developers/guides/attachment.html) and should contain at least enough information of the sender to allow the receiving FI to do their sanction check.

**sig** is the signature of the data block made by the sending FI. The receiving institution should check that this signature is valid against the public signature key that is posted in the sending FI's [stellar.toml](https://www.stellar.org/developers/guides/concepts/stellar-toml.html) (`SIGNING_KEY` field).

Example request body (please note it contains both parameters `data` and `sig`):
```
data=%7B%22sender%22%3A%22aldi%2AbankA.com%22%2C%22need_info%22%3Atrue%2C%22tx%22%3A%22AAAAAEhAArfpmUJYq%2FQ9SFAH3YDzNLJEBI9i9TXmJ7s608xbAAAAZAAMon0AAAAJAAAAAAAAAAPUg1%2FwDrMDozn8yfiCA8LLC0wF10q5n5lo0GiFQXpPsAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAAQAAAADdvkoXq6TXDV9IpguvNHyAXaUH4AcCLqhToJpaG6cCyQAAAAAAAAAAAJiWgAAAAAA%3D%22%2C%22attachment%22%3A%22%7B%5C%22nonce%5C%22%3A%5C%221488805458327055805%5C%22%2C%5C%22transaction%5C%22%3A%7B%5C%22sender_info%5C%22%3A%7B%5C%22address%5C%22%3A%5C%22678+Mission+St%5C%22%2C%5C%22city%5C%22%3A%5C%22San+Francisco%5C%22%2C%5C%22country%5C%22%3A%5C%22US%5C%22%2C%5C%22first_name%5C%22%3A%5C%22Aldi%5C%22%2C%5C%22last_name%5C%22%3A%5C%22Dobbs%5C%22%7D%2C%5C%22route%5C%22%3A%5C%221%5C%22%2C%5C%22note%5C%22%3A%5C%22%5C%22%2C%5C%22extra%5C%22%3A%5C%22%5C%22%7D%2C%5C%22operations%5C%22%3Anull%7D%22%7D&sig=KgvyQTZsZQoaMy8jdwCUfLayfgfFMUdZJ%2B0BIvEwiH5aJhBXvhV%2BipRok1asjSCUS%2FUaGeGKDoizS1%2BtFiiyAA%3D%3D

```

After decoding the `data` parameter it has a following form:

```json
{
  "sender": "aldi*bankA.com",
  "need_info": true,
  "tx": "AAAAAEhAArfpmUJYq/Q9SFAH3YDzNLJEBI9i9TXmJ7s608xbAAAAZAAMon0AAAAJAAAAAAAAAAPUg1/wDrMDozn8yfiCA8LLC0wF10q5n5lo0GiFQXpPsAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAAQAAAADdvkoXq6TXDV9IpguvNHyAXaUH4AcCLqhToJpaG6cCyQAAAAAAAAAAAJiWgAAAAAA=",
  "attachment": "{\"nonce\":\"1488805458327055805\",\"transaction\":{\"sender_info\":{\"address\":\"678 Mission St\",\"city\":\"San Francisco\",\"country\":\"US\",\"first_name\":\"Aldi\",\"last_name\":\"Dobbs\"},\"route\":\"1\",\"note\":\"\",\"extra\":\"\"},\"operations\":null}"
}
```

A few things to note:

- *memo* value of `tx` is a sha256 hash of the attachment
- *nonce* is unique to each individual transaction. When a transaction on the receiving end is `pending`, the same `nonce` should be sent to fetch updates about the `pending` transaction

`AUTH_SERVER` will return a JSON object with the following fields:

Name | Data Type | Description
-----|-----------|------------
`info_status` | `ok`, `denied`, `pending` | If this FI is willing to share AML information or not.
`tx_status` | `ok`, `denied`, `pending` | If this FI is willing to accept this transaction.
`dest_info` | string | *(only present if `info_status` is `ok`)* Marshalled JSON of the recipient's AML information.
`error` | string | *(only present if `info_status` or `tx_status` is `error` or for internal server errors)* Error message
`pending` | integer | *(only present if `info_status` or `tx_status` is `pending`)* Estimated number of seconds till the sender can check back for a change in status. The sender should just resubmit this request after the given number of seconds.

HTTP status code must be equal:
* `200 OK` if both `info_status` and `tx_status` are `ok`.
* `202 Accepted` if both statuses are `pending` or one is `pending` and second `ok`.
* `400 Bad Request` if data sent by the sender is invalid.
* `403 Forbidden` if any of `info_status` and `tx_status` are `denied`.
* `500 Internal Server Error` for server side errors.

Examples:

```
200 OK
```
```json
{
    "info_status": "ok",
    "tx_status": "ok",
    "dest_info": "{\"name\": \"John Doe\"}"
}
```
---
```
202 Accepted
```
```json
{
    "info_status": "ok",
    "tx_status": "pending",
    "dest_info": "{\"name\": \"John Doe\"}",
    "pending": 3600
}
```
---
```
400 Bad Request
```
```json
{
    "info_status": "ok",
    "tx_status": "error",
    "error": "Invalid country code."
}
```
---
```
403 Forbidden
```
```json
{
    "info_status": "deny",
    "tx_status": "ok"
}
```
---
```
500 Internal Server Error
```
```json
{
    "error": "Internal server error"
}
```

## Test Cases

Use [GoStellar](https://gostellar.org/) application to check if Compliance protocol was implemented correctly.

## Reference implementations

* [Reference Compliance server](https://github.com/stellar/bridge-server/blob/master/readme_compliance.md) developed by Stellar Development Foundation.
* [Compliance structures](https://github.com/stellar/go/tree/master/protocols/compliance).

