## Preamble

```
SEP: 0011
Title: Txrep: human-readable low-level representation of Stellar transactions
Author: David Mazières
Status: Active
Created: 2018-08-31
Updated: 2021-10-09
Version: 1.1.0
```

## Simple Summary

Txrep is a human-readable representation of Stellar transactions that functions like an assembly language for XDR.

## Abstract

This document specifies _txrep_, a human-readable format for Stellar transactions. Txrep is unambigous and
machine-parsable. Binary XDR transactions can be decompiled into txrep format and recompiled to the exact same binary
bytes. Txrep is designed to be parsed directly into data structures generated by XDR compilers, ideally by the very XDR
code generated by those compilers.

## Motivation

Bug reports, test vectors, semantic specifications in CAP documents, and Stellar documentation all need a way to talk
concretely about the contents of transactions. Without a canonical textual format, different documents will each devise
their own way of describing transactions, sometimes ambiguously, making it hard to relate information from multiple
sources.

Furthermore, advanced Stellar users and devlopers need a way to craft arbitrary transactions, including potentially
invalid ones for test cases. This functionality is currently available from the
[Stellar laboratory transaction builder](https://www.stellar.org/laboratory/#txbuilder), but that is not a good solution
for high security, as it requires a browser (and in practice requires trusting an HTTPS certificate). Moreover, the
transactions one builds in a web browser cannot easily be audited before signing, or described in documentation, or
scripted, or placed under version control.

Finally, "dumb" ink-on-paper contracts may need to specify Stellar transactions unambiguously. For example, a legal
contract promising to deliver tokens with a lock-up period in exchange for a wire transfer may want to specify the exact
lock-up mechanism used through a human readable description of the Stellar transactions involved. Using txrep, this
description can be unambiguous.

## Specification

A txrep file consists of a number of lines, each describing the value of a field. We describe the line format using a
simple BNF-like notation in which brackets (\[...\]) indicate optional contents, pipe (|) indicates alternatives, and an
asterisk (\*) indicates zero or more repetitions of the previous symbol. Literal text (e.g., `:`, `.`, `[`, `]`,
`._present`, `.len`, or `_`) indicates the occurence of those specific characters in the txrep source.

Each line of txrep has the following format:

> _line_ = _field_ `:` SP\* _value_ \[_comment_\] LF | `:` _comment_ LF | LF
>
> _comment_ = zero or more characters other than LF
>
> SP = space (ASCII 32)
>
> LF = newline (ASCII 10)

Blank lines are allowed, and any line starting with a colon (`:`) is a full-line comment. The _field_ and _value_
formats are described below.

### Fields

A field has the following syntax:

> _field_ = _tag_ _selector_\* \[_pseudoselector_\]
>
> _selector_ = `.` _tag_ | `[` _integer_ `]`
>
> _tag_ = _letter_ _wordchar_\*
>
> _pseudoselector_ = `.` `_inner`\* `_present` | `.len`
>
> _integer_ = A decimal integer
>
> _letter_ = Any letter
>
> _wordchar_ = Any letter, any digit, or `_`

Disregarding _pseudoselector_, each _field_ names a field in an
[XDR `TransactionEnvelope` data structure](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-core/blob/master/src/xdr/Stellar-transaction.x#L468).
The name is generated by joining XDR field names with a period (`.`), similar to the syntax used for accessing nested
fields in C++ or go representations of XDR data structures. Array elements (for both fixed- and variable-length arrays)
are indexed using square brackets. As in C, arrays are 0-based. Pseudoselectors of the form `_inner_present` (or
`_inner_inner_present`, etc.) are reserved for fields of type pointer to pointer. Such types do not appear in the
current version of `TransactionEnvelope`, but might in the future, or txrep might be applied to other XDR data types
that contain such nested pointers.

As an example, the _field_ `tx.timeBounds.minTime` names the `minTime` field in the `tx` field of a
`TransactionEnvelope`, as follows:

```c
typedef uint64 TimePoint;
struct TimeBounds {
    TimePoint minTime;
    TimePoint maxTime; // 0 here means no maxTime
};
struct Transaction {
    /* ... */
    TimeBounds* timeBounds;
    Operation operations<100>;
    /* ... */
};
```

Pointers and variable-length arrays use pseudoselectors to describe their state.

Pointers use the `._present` pseudoselector with value `true` or `false` to indicate that the field is present or NULL,
respectively. For example, a transaction with timebounds might be specified like this (using comments to annotate the
times):

    tx.timeBounds._present: true
    tx.timeBounds.minTime: 1535756672 (Fri Aug 31 16:04:32 PDT 2018)
    tx.timeBounds.maxTime: 1567292672 (Sat Aug 31 16:04:32 PDT 2019)

A transaction without timebounds would contain this line:

    tx.timeBounds._present: false

For fields of type pointer-to-pointer, the pseudoselector `._present` describes whether the outermost pointer is NULL or
not. If `._present` is `true`, then `._inner_present` describes whether the nested pointer is NULL or not. `_inner` can
be repeated as many times as needed for arbitrarily nested pointers.

Variable-length arrays use the pseudo-selector `.len` with an integer value to indicate the number of elements of the
variable-length array. Only indices from 0 to len-1 are meaningful. For example, a transaction with one operation might
look like this:

    tx.operations.len: 1
    tx.operations[0].sourceAccount._present: false
    tx.operations[0].body.type: PAYMENT
    ...

As with any XDR code, implementations must avoid pre-allocating arrays of size `len` to avoid memory exhaustion attacks,
and should instead repeatedly double arrays while deserializing txrep (thereby achieving amortized linear running time
without allocating memory that is more than a constant factor larger than the size of the txrep).

#### Versioned structures

For backwards compatibility, a few versioned structures are inlined as if their fields belonged to the parent datatype.
An example of such a structure is `TransactionV1Envelope`, defined in the following XDR

```c
union TransactionEnvelope switch (EnvelopeType type) {
case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_V0:
    TransactionV0Envelope v0;
case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX:
    TransactionV1Envelope v1;
case ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX_FEE_BUMP:
    FeeBumpTransactionEnvelope feeBump;
};

struct TransactionV1Envelope {
    Transaction tx;
    DecoratedSignature signatures<20>;
};
```

When such structures declared in field names of the form `v` followed by decimal digits, the selector (e.g., `v1`) is
omitted from txrep, yielding the following:

    type: ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX
    tx.sourceAccount: GAVRMS4QIOCC4QMOSKILOOOHCSO4FEKOXZPNLKFFN6W7SD2KUB7NBPLN
    tx.fee: 100
    ...

Without this rule, the fields would be called `tx.v1.sourceAccount`, etc.

The complete list of versioned structures is:

- All types that match the regular expression `TransactionV[0-9]+Envelope`.

### Values

Most XDR types are rendered using C syntax. Specifically:

#### Integers

All integers (signed and unsigned, 32- and 64-bit) are represented as C integers (decimal by default, but prefix `0x`
can be used for hex and `0` for octal).

#### Booleans

`bool` values are `true` or `false`

#### Enums

Enums are represented by the bare keyword of the value. They can also be specified numerically as "Type#Number" (e.g.,
`MemoType#3` is equivalent to `MEMO_HASH`).

#### Strings

`string` values are represented as double-quoted interpreted string literals, in which non-ASCII bytes are represented
with hex escapes (`"\xff"`), the `"` and `\` characters can be escaped with another `\` (e.g., `"\\"`), and `\n`
designates a newline.

#### Opaque

`opaque` values are represented as an unquoted hexadecimal string (using lower-case case `a`...`f`) with an even number
of digits. An exception is that the 0-length opaque vector is represented as "0" (a single digit). Implementations are
encouraged to add the comment "bytes" so that it reads "0 bytes" to further distinguish the 0-length vector from the
vector with a single byte 0x00 (rendered "00").

#### Aggregate Values

A few aggregate values are special-cased:

##### AlphaNum4, AlphaNum12

The `AlphaNum4` and `AlphaNum12` struct types are both rendered as a string `Code:IssuerAccountID`.

"Code" must consist of printable ASCII characters (octets 0x21 through 0x7e).

The sequence `\x` introduces a hex escape sequence, e.g., `\x00` to introduce a 0-valued byte. Otherwise, `\` escapes
the next character, so `\\` is required to introduce a backslash.

Stellar disallows assets of type `ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12` that have fewer than 5 bytes, but such assets can be
represented in binary XDR, and so in txrep an `AlphaNum12` value with fewer than 5 bytes in its `assetCode` is rendered
with trailing `\x00` (escaped NUL bytes) to as to make the length 5---e.g., the 12-byte asset code `ABC` is rendered
`ABC\x00\x00`. Note that stellar-core disallows non ASCII bytes in `AssetCode` fields, so the primary use of this
feature is to construct or examine invalid transaction test cases.

##### Asset, TrustLineAsset

The `Asset`, and `TrustLineAsset` union types are rendered as a string in one of three forms dependent on their
discriminant:

- `native` (or any string up to 12 characters not containing an unescaped colon) for the native asset, i.e.
  `ASSET_TYPE_NATIVE`.

- `Code:IssuerAccountID` as defined for `AlphaNum4` or `AlphaNum12` for issued assets, i.e.
  `ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM4` and `ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12`.

- `LiquidityPoolID:lp` for liquidity pool shares, i.e. assets of type `ASSET_TYPE_POOL_SHARE`.

  "LiquidityPoolID" is the hex encoded `PoolID` using a lowercase alphabet.

  "lp" is the string `"lp"`.

##### AllowTrustOp

The `asset` field of `AllowTrustOp` is rendered the same as the Code in `Asset`, only without the trailing
":IssuerAccountID" (since the issuer is the `sourceAccount` of the operation).

##### PublicKey, SignerKey, MuxedAccount

`PublicKey`, `SignerKey`, and `MuxedAccount` are rendered as unquoted strings in strkey format, as specified in
[SEP-0023](sep-0023.md).

#### Others

Any fields in the XDR `TransactionEnvelope` structure that are not specified in a txrep description are to be
interpreted as false for `bool`, zero (for numeric values, enums, fixed-length `opaque`), or zero-length (for strings,
variable-length arrays, and variable-length `opaque`). The `_present` pseudo-selector, if unspecified, defaults to true
if any field or value of the pointer's data structure is specified, and otherwise defaults to `_false`.

### Normalized txrep

Fields in txrep are specified in an order-independent way. If a field appears twice, the second value overrides the
first. This allows one to update a txrep-format transaction by appending lines to a file. However, in some cases, such
as when disassembling binary transactions, it is useful to transform transactions into normalized form, for instance so
two transactions can be more easily compared, or so users inspecting a transaction see a more predictable format.

_Normalized txrep_ format is a _txrep_ format with the following additional restrictions:

- Every field and pseudofield in the the binary XDR transaction must appear exactly once in the description. Extraneous
  fields or fields that do not appear because of NULL pointers or incompatible union discriminants must not appear.

- Fields in structs and unions must appear in the exact order they appear in the XDR file, which is also the order in
  which they are marshaled for XDR binary format. In particular, this also requires array elements to be listed in order
  from 0 to the length of the array.

- Pseudo-fields must appear immediately before the values they affect. In particular, the `ptr._present: true` field
  must appear immediately before the value of `ptr`, and `vector.len` must appear immediately before `vector[0]`.

- Codes in `Asset` and `AllowTrustOp` should escape `\`, `:` and any byte outside the range 0x21-0x7e, but no other
  bytes. Trailing `\x00` should not be shown except as needed to show an asset of type `ASSET_TYPE_CREDIT_ALPHANUM12`
  fewer than 5 non-zero bytes.

- Enums must be shown as their symbolic value, rather than "Type#Number", unless there is no symbolic value.

- The native asset should be rendered as `XLM` for the Stellar public network, `TestXLM` for the Stellar test network,
  and, in the absence of a convention for any other network, `native`.

One possible use of non-normalized txrep is to allow users to discover missing fields. A tool that allows users to
construct transactions in txrep format can translate the transactions to normalized format to highlight any missing
fields along with their default values. In contexts where users should not leave any fields missing, tools can refuse to
accept non-normalized txrep.

## Rationale

Txrep is designed to be easy to read into and generate from structures created by XDR compilers using code generated by
XDR compilers. Writing txrep simply requires printing each field and value in an XDR structure instead of rendering it
in binary format. Txrep can also trivially be read into a key-value map, as almost every language has functions to read
files line-by-line and break strings at a specific character (to separate field and value at `:`). The map can then be
consulted in XDR deserialization routines to read txrep.

Tailoring txrep specifically to XDR means it does not introduce a second native representation for transactions. Third
party libraries for other popular formats such as JSON and YAML generally cannot be parsed directly into a
`TransactionEnvelope` structure generated by an XDR compiler, in part because of XDR's tagged unions. Moreover, the
ability to parse and generate txrep with nothing more than an XDR implementation reduces the attack surface of programs
that process txrep.

Because each line of txrep is entirely self-contained, one can excerpt any subset of a transaction with no ambiguity.
Because txrep takes the last value of a field, one can overwrite any previously set transaction field. This is
convenient for scripts that may wish to tweak values by appending lines to a transaction template.

A few special cases (for signers, accounts, and assets) make the output easier for humans to process by providing
compatibility with other tools.

The `._present` pseudoselector was selected to avoid conflicting with fields in the same data structure, since the XDR
specification disallows fields that start with `_`. There is no similar ambiguity possible for `.len`, whose only
siblings are bracketed array indices.

## Test Cases

The following binary transaction:

AAAAAgAAAAArFkuQQ4QuQY6SkLc5xxSdwpFOvl7VqKVvrfkPSqB+0AAAAGQApSmNAAAAAQAAAAEAAAAAW4nJgAAAAABdav0AAAAAAQAAABZFbmpveSB0aGlzIHRyYW5zYWN0aW9uAAAAAAABAAAAAAAAAAEAAAAAQF827djPIu+/gHK5hbakwBVRw03TjBN6yNQNQCzR97QAAAABVVNEAAAAAAAyUlQyIZKfbs+tUWuvK7N0nGSCII0/Go1/CpHXNW3tCwAAAAAX15OgAAAAAAAAAAFKoH7QAAAAQN77Tx+tHCeTJ7Va8YT9zd9z9Peoy0Dn5TSnHXOgUSS6Np23ptMbR8r9EYWSJGqFdebCSauU7Ddo3ttikiIc5Qw=

Can be rendered like this (note that comments are optional and may contain implementation-dependent information):

    type: ENVELOPE_TYPE_TX
    tx.sourceAccount: GAVRMS4QIOCC4QMOSKILOOOHCSO4FEKOXZPNLKFFN6W7SD2KUB7NBPLN
    tx.fee: 100
    tx.seqNum: 46489056724385793
    tx.timeBounds._present: true
    tx.timeBounds.minTime: 1535756672 (Fri Aug 31 16:04:32 PDT 2018)
    tx.timeBounds.maxTime: 1567292672 (Sat Aug 31 16:04:32 PDT 2019)
    tx.memo.type: MEMO_TEXT
    tx.memo.text: "Enjoy this transaction"
    tx.operations.len: 1
    tx.operations[0].sourceAccount._present: false
    tx.operations[0].body.type: PAYMENT
    tx.operations[0].body.paymentOp.destination: GBAF6NXN3DHSF357QBZLTBNWUTABKUODJXJYYE32ZDKA2QBM2H33IK6O
    tx.operations[0].body.paymentOp.asset: USD:GAZFEVBSEGJJ63WPVVIWXLZLWN2JYZECECGT6GUNP4FJDVZVNXWQWMYI
    tx.operations[0].body.paymentOp.amount: 400004000 (40.0004e7)
    tx.ext.v: 0
    signatures.len: 1
    signatures[0].hint: 4aa07ed0 (GAVRMS4QIOCC4QMOSKILOOOHCSO4FEKOXZPNLKFFN6W7SD2KUB7NBPLN)
    signatures[0].signature: defb4f1fad1c279327b55af184fdcddf73f4f7a8cb40e7e534a71d73a05124ba369db7a6d31b47cafd118592246a8575e6c249ab94ec3768dedb6292221ce50c

## Implementations

### Golang

Txrep is implemented by the Stellar transaction compiler, [stc](https://github.com/xdrpp/stc).

### JavaScript

Txrep is implemented as a JavaScript library for browser or NodeJS,
[@stellarguard/txrep](https://github.com/stellarguard/txrep).

### Flutter SDK

Txrep is implemented by the Flutter SDK. See
[Soneso/stellar_flutter_sdk](https://github.com/Soneso/stellar_flutter_sdk/blob/master/documentation/sdk_examples/sep-0011-txrep.md).

### iOS SDK

Txrep is implemented by the iOS SDK. See
[example](https://github.com/Soneso/stellar-ios-mac-sdk/blob/master/docs/SEP-0011.md).

### PHP SDK

Txrep is implemented by the PHP SDK. See
[example](https://github.com/Soneso/stellar-php-sdk/blob/main/examples/sep-0011-txrep.md).
