## Preamble

```
SEP: 0027
Title: Asset Information
Author: Fritz Ekwoge(@efritze), Ernest Mbenkum (@cameroon)
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-11-22
Updated: 2019-11-22
Version: 0.1.0
```

## Simple Summary

If you are an anchor or issuer, the `info_server` endpoint is used to provide a common place where the Internet, wallet integrators, and other stellar clients can find out more information about your asset. Asset  information obtained via the `info_server` API endpoint supplements asset information found in [`stellar.toml`](sep-0001.md), while also providing a more standard way to localize asset information. Anchors are encouraged to provide an  `info_server` endpoint for each of their assets.




## Specification

The url for the asset information server will be located inside the field: `info_server`, which itself will be placed under the relevant [[CURRENCIES]] table in stellar.toml. 

```toml
[[CURRENCIES]]
code = "BTC"
issuer = "GCKLZLMYTLRBKM6BDZJYAKHDBSNCGBSN7EDF32FMIAYFAITLCB45ZJW4"
is_asset_anchored = true
anchor_asset_type="crypto"
anchor_asset="BTC"
status="live"

info_server="https://acme.inc/api/v1/asset_info/"
```

You must enable CORS on the `info_server` endpoint so people can access this api endpoint  from other sites. The following HTTP header must be set from an `info_server` GET response.

```
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
```

It is also recommended to set an `application/json` content type so that browsers render the contents, rather than prompting for a download.

```
content-type: application/json
```

The response from an `info_server` GET request  can have a maximum file size of 100KB.

All info_server endpoints should be served over a secure channel like https.

## Request

```
GET info_server

```

Request Parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`asset_code` | (required) string | The code of the asset, e.g. BTC, ETH, USD, INR, etc. This should not  be different from the asset code that the anchor issues.
`asset_issuer` | (required) string | The issuer of the asset. 
`lang` | (optional) string |  Defaults to `en`. Language code specified using [ISO 639-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1). Fields in the response should be in this language.

Example:

```
GET https://btc.anchor.io/asset_info?asset_code=ETH&asset_issuer=GACW7NONV43MZIFHCOKCQJAKSJSISSICFVUJ2C6EZIW5773OU3HD64VI&lang=fr
```

## Error Response

Every HTTP status code other than `200 OK` will be considered an error. 
For example:

```json
{
   "error": "This anchor doesn't support the given currency code: ETH"
}
```

## OK Response
The HTTP status code for a succesful response should be `200 OK`.

The response should be a JSON object like:

```json
{
    "name": "Bitcoin",
    "description": "ACME Inc promises to purchase each BTC token from any holder for the value of 1 Bitcoin",
    "conditions": "Withdrawal fees apply.",
    "logo": "https://acme.inc/btc_logo.png",
    "redemption_instructions": "Use any Stellar SEP26 compatible wallet.",

    "org": {
        "name": "Acme BTC Inc",
        "dba": "Acme BTC",
        "url": "https://acme.inc/btc/",
        "logo": "https://acme.inc/logo.png",
        "desc": "BTC Stellar anchor service",
        "physical_address": "Cybertron",
        "phone_number": "+123456789",
        "phone_number_attestation": "",
        "keybase": "@acme",
        "twitter": "@acme",
        "email": "hello_btc@acme.inc"
    },

    "transfer_protocols" : {
        "sep24": {
            "...": "..."
        },
        "sep26": {
            "..." : "..."
        }
    }
    
}
```

### Root level response fields.

Values set here override equivalent values defined in `stellar.toml`.

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
name | string (<= 20 char) | A short name for the token
description | string | Description of token and what it represents
conditions | string | Conditions on token
logo | url | URL to a PNG image on a transparent background representing token
redemption_instructions | string | If anchored token, these are instructions to redeem the underlying asset from tokens.


### Organization response fields.

Optional, but anchors are recommended to provide more information regarding the organization  anchoring an asset.

Organization information is placed inside the root-level `org` field.

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
name | string | Legal name of your organization
dba | string | (may not apply) [DBA](https://www.entrepreneur.com/encyclopedia/doing-business-as-dba) of your organization
url | uses `https://` | Your organization's official URL. Your `stellar.toml` must be hosted on the same domain.
logo | url | A PNG image of your organization's logo on a transparent background
description | string | Short description of your organization
physical_address | string | Physical address for your organization
physical_address_attestation | `https://` url | URL on the same domain as your `url` that contains an image or pdf official document attesting to your physical address. It must list your `name` or `dba` as the party at the address. Only documents from an official third party are acceptable. E.g. a utility bill, mail from a financial institution, or business license.
phone_number | string | Your organization's phone number in [E.164 format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.164), e.g. `+14155552671`. See also [this guide](https://support.twilio.com/hc/en-us/articles/223183008-Formatting-International-Phone-Numbers).
phone_number_attestation | `https://` url | URL on the same domain as your `url` that contains an image or pdf of a phone bill showing both the phone number and your organization's name.
keybase | string | A [Keybase](https://keybase.io/) account name for your organization. Should contain proof of ownership of any public online accounts you list here, including your organization's domain.
twitter | string | Your organization's Twitter account
github | string | Your organization's Github account
email | string | An email where clients can contact your organization. Must be hosted at your `url` domain.
licensing_authority | string | Name of the authority or agency that licensed your organization, if applicable
license_type | string | Type of financial or other license your organization holds, if applicable
license_number | string | Official license number of your organization, if applicable

Issuers that list verified information including phone/address attestations and [Keybase](https://keybase.io/) verifications will be prioritized by Stellar clients.

### Transfer protocols response fields.

(Optional)

Certain anchors may provide users with the option to  deposit or withdraw assets in and out of the Stellar network, directly from their wallets. For such assets, the `transaction_protocols` field is an object  containing all transfer protocols the anchor supports for that asset. 

Pure stellar assets that only exist within the Stellar network need not define this field. 

Asset-backed tokens on the other hand are encouraged to either implement [SEP24](sep-0024.md) for interactive anchor/wallet asset transfer, or [SEP26](sep-0026.md) for non-interactive anchor/wallet asset transfer.

The `"..."` placeholders  will be replaced with fields defined by each transfer protocol. See [SEP24](sep-0024.md) and [SEP26](sep-0026.md) for more details.