## Preamble

```
SEP: 0009
Title: Standard KYC / AML fields
Author: stellar.org
Status: Accepted
Created: 2018-07-15
Updated: 2018-07-15
Version 1.0.0
```

## Simple Summary

This SEP defines a list of standard KYC and AML fields for use in Stellar ecosystem protocols. Issuers, banks, and other entities on Stellar should use these fields when sending or requesting KYC / AML information with other parties on Stellar. This is an evolving list, so please suggest any missing fields that you use.

This is a list of possible fields that may be necessary to handle many different use cases, there is no expectation that any particular fields be used for a particular application. Which fields to use in a particular case is determined by the needs of the KYC or AML application.

## Encodings

ISO encodings are used for fields wherever possible. The table below lists the encodings used for different types of information.

Field Type | Number of characters | Format / Encoding
-----------|----------------------|------------------
language | 2 | [ISO 639-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1)
country | 3 | [ISO 3166-1 alpha-3](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_3166-1_alpha-3)
date | 10 | [ISO 8601](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601) date-only format
phone number | varies | [E.164](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.164)

## KYC / AML Fields

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`family_name` or `last_name` | string | Family or last name
`given_name` or `first_name` | string | Given or first name
`additional_name` | string | Middle name or other additional name
`address_country_code` | country code | country code for current address
`state_or_province` | string | name of state/province/region/prefecture
`city` | string | name of city/town
`postal_code` | string | Postal or other code identifying user's locale
`address` | string | Entire address (country, state, postal code, street address, etc...) as a multi-line string
`phone_number` | phone number | Phone number with country code, in E.164 format
`alt_phone_number` | phone number | Alternate phone number with country code, in E.164 format
`email_address` | string | Email address
`birth_date` | date | Date of birth, e.g. `1976-07-04`
`birth_place` | date | Place of birth (city, state, country; as on passport)
`birth_country_code` | country code | ISO Code of country of birth
`bank_account_number` | string | Number identifying bank account
`bank_number` | string | Number identifying bank (routing number in US)
`bank_phone_number` | string | Phone number with country code for bank
`tax_id` | string | Tax identifier of user in their country (social security number in US)
`tax_id_name` | string | Name of the tax ID (`SSN` or `ITIN` in the US)
`employer_name` | string | Name of employer
`employer_address` | string | Address of employer
`language_code` | language code | primary language
`id_type` | string | `passport`, `drivers_license`, `id_card`, etc...
`id_country_code` | country code | country issuing passport or photo ID as ISO 3166-1 alpha-3 code
`id_issue_date` | string | ID issue date
`id_expiration_date` | date | ID expiration date
`id_number` | string | Passport or ID number
`photo_id_front` | binary | Image of front of user's photo ID or passport
`photo_id_back` | binary | Image of back of user's photo ID or passport
`notary_approval_of_photo_id` | binary | Image of notary's approval of photo ID or passport

## Explanation

Where possible we use field names from [schema.org](https://schema.org/Person). Words are separated with underlines as that convention has previously been established in Stellar protocols.

### Addresses

Address formatting varies widely from country to country and even within each country. See [here](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/11160192/how-to-parse-freeform-street-postal-address-out-of-text-and-into-components) for details. Rather than attempting to create a field for each possible part of an address in every country, this protocol takes a middle of the road approach. Address fields that are fairly universal can be encoded with the `country_code`, `state_or_province`, `city`, and `postal_code` fields. Full addresses, however, should be encoded as a single multi-line string in the `address` field. This allows any address in the world to be represented with a limited number of fields. If address parsing is necessary, parsing will be easier since the country, city, and postal code are already separate fields.
