## Preamble

```
SEP: 0042
Title: Stellar Asset List (SAL)
Authors: Tim Baker <@silence48>, Orbit Lens <@orbitlens>
Track: Standard
Status: Draft
Created: 2023-10-18
Updated: 2023-11-29
Version: 0.2.1
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/g/stellar-dev/c/INcUDbB8ZkA
            https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/pull/1440
            https://discord.com/channels/897514728459468821/1162558946867953704
```

## Abstract

This standard aims to enhance user experiences and trust by standardizing a mechanism for defining, validating, and
sharing curated lists of Stellar assets, while ensuring ease of integration for wallets and applications across the
Stellar network.

## Dependencies

- [SEP-0001](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0001.md)

## Motivation

While some Stellar-based platforms offer curated asset lists, there is a need for a universal approach for creating and
sharing comprehensive, community-driven asset lists. This proposal presents a methodology to facilitate the creation,
endorsement, and consumption of such curated lists, augmenting consumer trust while simplifying asset integrations
across ecosystem applications and services. This generalized approach not only increases interface decentralization,
eliminating the requirement of vendor-locked asset lists, but also provide means for feedback and collaboration with the
entire Stellar community.

## Specification

SAL is a specification for lists of asset metadata that can be used by any Stellar applications and services which rely
on externally curated asset catalogs published by trusted providers. Any organization can create, maintain, and publish
an asset list following the guidelines outlined in this standard. Inclusion of any particular asset in a list should not
be considered as endorsement or recommendation of any kind.

### List Format

Assets metadata is published in a JSON format with the following structure:

```json
{
  "name": "Fantasy Token Universe",
  "provider": "MagicalFinance",
  "description": "Assets traded on the MagicalFinance DEX platform",
  "version": "2.3",
  "feedback": "https://magical.finance/asset-list/contact",
  "assets": [
    {
      "contract": "CGAMER1Y4U6AZEDPMQNRUT7ZH6UUSK6C3TWVLMJ64M3DIMQGYXF4GYQJO",
      "code": "DRGN",
      "issuer": "GDRAKET5NDQ4MTZXFA7ATZZA5LQIU7GQNZWKF5TKO5AFJLAAI77XDRGN",
      "name": "Dragon Coin",
      "org": "DragonKeepers Federation",
      "domain": "fantasytokens.com",
      "icon": "https://fantasytokens.com/drgn.png",
      "decimals": 14
    },
    {
      "code": "EGLD",
      "issuer": "GDRAKET5NDQ4MTZXFA7ATZZA5LQIU7GQNZWKF5TKO5AFJLAAI77XDRGN",
      "name": "Elven Gold",
      "org": "Elven Treasury",
      "domain": "fantasytokens.com",
      "icon": "bafkreicjdptvjcidbwsnbeddt2uhl3tej4crgmgsvlxarlg3fsc4a2i454",
      "decimals": 7,
      "comment": "Official currency of Elven lands, endorsed by Elven Treasury."
    },
    {
      "contract": "CORCMINT7R52SZMIQBOVNQZJ5QGN5XC2JFB3MYUBL4LEZ5I5YDQY3ORC",
      "name": "Orc Steel",
      "org": "Orcish Smith Guild",
      "domain": "orcforged.dapp",
      "icon": "https://fantasytokens.com/orcst.png",
      "decimals": 3
    }
  ]
}
```

In order to be considered valid, an asset list must validate against
[this JSON schema](../contents/sep-0042/assetlist.schema.json).

A list should not contain the `native` (Stellar XLM) asset to prevent possible naming conflicts.

### List Publication

A list providers can advertise the existence of curated asset lists through their
[SEP-1](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0001.md) `stellar.toml` file.
`ASSET_LISTS` section represented as an array, containing URLs of published lists.

```toml
...
ASSET_LISTS = [
  "https://provider.domain/assetlist1.json",
  "https://provider.domain/assetlist2.json"
]
```

Here:

- `name` - Short descriptive title of the list (max 30 chars)
- `provider` - Organization or entity that put together the list (max 50 chars)
- `description` - Text description of the list to display alongside with the name (optional, max 150 chars)
- `version` - Current list revision
- `network` - Stellar network identifier ("public" or "testnet")
- `feedback` - URL or GitHub repository address where users can report bad actors or request addition of new assets
- `assets` - Contains an array of asset metadata entries
  - `name` - Descriptive asset name
  - `contract` - Asset contract address in StrKey encoding
  - `code` - Asset code (for Classic assets) or value returned by `symbol()` function (for Soroban assets)
  - `issuer` - Asset issuer address (for Classic assets, ignored for pure Soroban tokens)
  - `org` - Issuer organization/company (max 30 chars)
  - `domain` - FQDN of the site that hosts asset-related `stellar.toml` format
  - `icon` - Icon URL (only HTTPS protocol is supported) or IPFS hash
  - `decimals` - Number of decimals to display (optional)
  - `comment` - Alerts, messages, or other additional information specified by the provider (max 150 chars)

### Changes and Versioning

The `version` field should be updated every time the list changes, following a short semantic versioning format:

- Major version is incremented when assets were added/removed, or if an asset contract address has been changed.
- Minor version is incremented when other asset details were updated.
- Modifications of the top-level `description` field and `assets.comment` field should not result in `version` changes.

Fields `name` and `provider` should be immutable to facilitate the matching logic for consumer applications.

### Hosting

Asset lists should be published over HTTPS protocol in JSON format following the structure described above. In case of
HTTPS, the list can be a static file or a dynamically generated server response with CORS HTTP header, with
`application/json` content type, and served from the domain (or a subdomain) which hosts the `stellar.toml` file itself.

CORS response header example:

```
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
Content-Type: application/json
```

The size of any individual list should not exceed 200KB. If providers want to advertise more assets, they can maintain
several separate asset lists for this purpose.

### Consumer UX

User-focused consumer applications should provide an option of selecting one or more asset lists in the interface,
preferably using checkboxes, multiselect, or another similar UX controls. To provide relevant context for a user, an
application must display information from at least `name` and `provider` fields in such a checklist, with an option to
show more details about selected assets.

### Composability

When several asset lists selected in a consumer application, the interface should display assets from all of them.
Potentially, this may result in collisions if similar assets are present in different lists (e.g. with the same name).
To resolve possible contradictions, the `contract` field or the combination of `code`+`issuer` fields should be treated
as a unique ID of an asset. Consumer applications must utilize this approach to avoid displaying duplicate assets in the
assets list. It's up to the developers how to resolve collision of other properties for assets found in multiple asset
lists.

## Design Rationale

Given the extensive nature of asset lists and limitations of TOML format, JSON was utilized for its capacity and
ubiquity, ensuring detailed asset specifications without breaching size constraints. To decouple list references from
data, asset lists are advertised in the `stellar.toml` file to facilitate accessible integration and compatibility with
existing Stellar standards. This decoupling also provides additional flexibility for the provider: asset lists can be
either stored as static JSON files or dynamically generated on the server.

Due to unique asset structures and the Soroban/Classic duality, the SAL is tailored to Stellar technical aspects,
diverging from standards existing for other blockchain, like Ethereum’s TokenLists.

This standard aims to find the balance between providing relevant asset information and minimizing transferred data
size, which is especially important in case of mobile browsers. The decision to allow publication of more than one SAL
in `stellar.toml` aims to provide means for lists segmentation by categories, as well as dealing with size limitations.

Additional asset information can be fetched from the `stellar.toml` file hosted on the `domain` specified in the asset
description. The `comment` field facilitates the transparent sharing of supplementary information regarding assets
communicated by the list provider, enhancing user awareness and engagement.

The decision to allow hosting icons on both HTTPS and IPFS protocols contributes to higher hosting versatility and fault
tolerance for asset logos.

List versioning allows downstream applications to refresh asset information obtained from the list only when it changes.

Users can submit their feedback, report bad actors or request addition of new assets by contacting the provider via the
communication channel specified in the `feedback` field.

General interface recommendations laid out in "Composability" and "Consumer UX" sections intended to at least partially
unify user experience of asset lists across ecosystem wallets following best practices gathered from prior experience.

## Security Concerns

Allowing users to unrestrictedly connect arbitrary asset lists in the application interface is potentially dangerous
because bad actors can carry on attacks to spoof legitimate assets by mimicking asset name and logo. Therefore,
application developer should either depend only on several trustworthy providers or utilize the community-maintained
repository of curated asset lists.

Displaying the `assets.comment` contents in the interface might confuse end-users and, depending on the context, can be
regarded as endorsements. So it's up to the application developers whether to show these comments to end users.

## Implementation

- Community-managed GitHub repository for the [Asset Lists Catalog](https://github.com/stellar-asset-lists/index).  
  It contains references to asset lists created by ecosystem providers. Client applications can use it to discover,
  fetch available lists, and allow their users to select trusted providers in the interface. Web UI for this catalog is
  available [here](https://stellar.expert/asset-lists).
- Basic [JS library](https://www.npmjs.com/package/@stellar-asset-lists/sdk) that simplifies integration of asset lists
  into web applications.
- [Lobstr Curated List](https://lobstr.co/api/v1/sep/assets/curated.json) by UltraStellar.
- [Soroswap List](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/soroswap/token-list/main/tokenList.json) by SoroswapFinance.
- [StellarExpert Top50](https://api.stellar.expert/explorer/public/asset-list/top50) asset list for Stellar Pubnet.
- [StellarExpert Testnet Top50](https://api.stellar.expert/explorer/testnet/asset-list/top50) asset list for Stellar
  Testnet.

## Changelog

- [`v0.1.0`](https://github.com/silence48/stellar-protocol/blob/71434132553009d8213db344927a6b0059d7d1ae/ecosystem/sep-0042.md)
  Initial draft.
- [`v0.2.0`](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/pull/1409) JSON validation schema, TOML file advertisement,
  publication, versioning, composability, design rationale, security concerns.
- [`v0.2.1`](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/pull/1440) Asset fields clarification, required `network`,
  reference implementations
