
## Preamble

```
SEP: 0031
Title: Direct Payments
Author: SDF
Status: Active
Created: 2020-04-07
Updated: 2021-04-20
Version 1.2.1
```

## Simple Summary

This SEP defines a protocol for enabling payments between two financial accounts that exist outside the Stellar network.

## Abstract

The entities involved in a transaction are:

- A **Sending Client**: The owner of the origin financial account.
- A **Sending Anchor**: The business receiving funds from the Sending Client and delivering them to the Receiving Anchor for the Receiving Client. Must have a business relationship with the Receiving Anchor.
- A **Receiving Anchor**: The business receiving funds from the Sending Anchor and delivering them to the Receiving Client.
- A **Receiving Client**: The owner of the destination financial account.

At a high level, the following steps are performed to complete a transaction:

1. The Sending Client sends funds from their financial account to the Sending Anchor's financial account (off/on-Stellar)
2. The Sending Anchor sends the funds to the Receiving Anchor's Stellar account (on-Stellar)
3. The Receiving Anchor sends funds to the Receiving Client's financial account (off-Stellar)

Typically, the Sending and Receiving Clients reside in different regulatory jurisdictions and therefore a payment between their financial accounts must be facilitated by two business entities, the Sending and Receiving Anchors, who have the necessary licenses in their respective jurisdictions.

## Example

Alice in Nigeria wants to send money to Bob in Europe. Alice signs up with NigeriaPay to make this payment to send money directly into Bob’s bank account. Bob doesn’t need to do anything, or know anything about this payment, besides letting Alice know what his bank account information is. Alice only needs to deal with her anchor (NigeriaPay). Alice passes this information and her money to NigeriaPay, and NigeriaPay sends those funds to the EuroPay Anchor service, and Europay deposits those funds into Bob’s bank account.

## Prerequisites

* The Receiving Anchor must define `DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER` in their [`stellar.toml`](sep-0001.md).
* The Sending and Receiving Anchors must create bi-lateral agreements to interoperate with each other.
* If the Receiving Anchor requires KYC information for the Sending or Receiving Clients, the Receiving Anchor must implement [SEP-12](sep-0012.md) and define a `KYC_SERVER` in their [stellar.toml](sep-0001.md).

## Authentication

Sending Anchors must authenticate with Receiving Anchors via [SEP-10 Web Authentication](sep-0010.md). Sending Anchors must provide the Stellar account they will authenticate with to their Receiving Anchors, and Receiving Anchors must ensure that the authenticated Stellar account belongs to a Sending Anchor for which a bi-lateral agreement has been made.

The SEP-10 JWT be included as a header in requests to all endpoints:

```
Authorization: Bearer <JWT>
```

Any API request that fails to meet proper authentication should return a 403 Forbidden response.

## HTTPS Only

This protocol involves the transfer of value, and so HTTPS is required for all endpoints for security.  Anchors should refuse to interact with any insecure HTTP endpoints.

## Content Type

All endpoints accept in requests the following `Content-Type`s:

- `application/json`

All endpoints respond with content type:

- `application/json`

## Asset Conversions and Liquidity Strategies

This protocol is designed for the common case where the Sending Client provides the Sending Anchor with a particular asset (the source asset) and the Receiving Client receives a different asset (the destination asset). It is possible to use this protocol when the Sending and Receiving clients wish to send and receive the same asset, but that is not the common use case it has been designed.

When the source asset and destination assets are different, the source asset must convert into the receiving asset at some point prior to delivering funds to the Receiving Client. This conversion must be done by either the Sending Anchor, the Stellar Network, or the Receiving Anchor. The subsections below outline the strategies used for each method.

### Sending Anchor Asset Conversion

The Sending Anchor can collect the source asset from the Sending Client and send the destination asset to the Receiving Anchor. 

This approach requires the Sending Anchor to provide an exchange rate, or quote, to the Sending Client. It also requires the Sending Anchor to hold a balance of the destination asset on Stellar. The Sending Anchor would use Payment operations to send the quoted amount of the destination asset to the Receiving Anchor.

### Stellar Network Asset Conversion

Instead of holding a balance of the destination asset on Stellar, the Sending Anchor can use Path Payments to convert the source asset to the destination asset on the Stellar Network. 

This approach requires a sufficiently liquid market to exist between the source and destination assets on the Stellar Decentralized Exchange (SDEX).

### Receiving Anchor Asset Conversion

Finally, the Receiving Anchor can receive payments of the source asset on Stellar and deliver payments of the destination asset to the Receiving Client. 

This requires the Receiving Anchor to implement the [SEP-38 Anchor RFQ API](sep-0038.md), which enables the Receiving Anchor to provide quotes to the Sending Anchor. These quotes can be [indicative](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/i/indicativequote.asp) or [firm](https://www.investopedia.com/terms/f/firmquote.asp). If a firm quote is used, the Stellar transaction _must_ be submitted to the Stellar network prior to the quote's expiration. More specifically, the `created_at` timestamp returned in the [Horizon GET /transactions/:id](https://developers.stellar.org/api/resources/transactions/) request must be earlier than the quote's expiration.

## API Endpoints

* [`GET /info`](#get-info)
* [`POST /transactions`](#post-transactions)
* [`GET /transactions/:id`](#get-transaction)
* [`PATCH /transactions/:id`](#patch-transaction)

### Detailed Sending Anchor Flow

1. The Sending Client initiates a payment to the Receiving Client.
1. The Sending Anchor identifies the Receiving Anchor it will use for the payment based on the receipient's location.
1. The Sending Anchor makes a request to the Receiving Anchor's `GET /info` endpoint to collect asset information and the `transaction.fields` describing the transaction-related information required by the Receiving Anchor.
1. The Sending Anchor fetches the relevant KYC `type` values from the `sep12` object for the Sending and Receiving Client. If no `type` values are defined for either client, KYC information is not required for that client.
1. The Sending Anchor makes [SEP-12 GET /customer?type=](sep-0012.md#customer-get) requests for the Sending and Receiving Clients. The response includes the [SEP-9](sep-0009.md) KYC attributes required for registering a client of the associated `type`.
1. The Sending Anchor collects all required information from the Sending Client. This includes the custom fields listed in the Receiving Anchor's `GET /info` response as well as the KYC fields described in the `GET /customer` responses for both the Sending and Recieving Clients. How the Sending Anchor collects this information from the Sending Client is out of the scope of this document, but the Receving Client should not be required to take any action in order for the Sending Client to make the payment to the Receiving Anchor.
1. The Sending Anchor makes [SEP-12 PUT /customer](sep-0012.md#customer-put) requests containing the collected information for each client.
1. If the Receiving Anchor supports the [SEP-38 Anchor RFQ API](sep-0038.md), the Sending Anchor can request a quote from the Receiving Anchor. See the [Receiving Anchor Asset Conversion](#receiving-anchor-asset-conversion) section for more information.
1. The Sending Anchor makes a `POST /transactions` request to create a transaction record with the Receiving Anchor. This request contains the `id`s returned by the `PUT /customer` requests, the `transaction.fields` values collected from the Sending Client, as well as the transaction information. The response will include a `id` that will be used to check the status of the transaction.
1. The Sending Anchor makes `GET /transactions/:id` requests until the transaction's `status` is `pending_sender`. 
1. The Sending Anchor submits the payment transaction to Stellar.
1. The Sending Anchor makes `GET /transactions/:id` requests until the transaction's `status` is `completed`, `error`, `pending_customer_info_update`, or `pending_transaction_info_update`.
1. If `completed`, the Sending Anchor should notify the Sending Client that funds have been delivered to the Receiving Client.
1. If `error`, the Receiving Anchor should be contacted to resolve the situation.
1. If `pending_transaction_info_update`, the `transaction.fields` values collected from the Sending Client were invalid and must be corrected by the Sending Client. See the [Pending Transaction Info Update](#pending-transaction-info-update) section for more information.
1. If `pending_customer_info_update`, the SEP-9 KYC values collected were invalid and must be corrected by the Sending Client. See the [Pending Customer Info Update](#pending-customer-info-update) section for more information.
1. After providing the Receiving Anchor with updated values, the status should ultimately change to `completed`.

### Detailed Receiving Anchor Flow

1. The Sending Anchor makes a request to the Receiving Anchor's `GET /info` endpoint.
1. The Sending Anchor makes a `SEP-12 GET /customer` request for the Sending and Receiving Clients if required.
1. The Sending Anchor makes a `SEP-12 PUT /customer` request for the Sending and Receiving Clients if required.
  1. The Receiving Anchor must validate the KYC data provided and reject the request with useful error messages if invalid.
1. The Sending Anchor may request a quote using the `SEP-38 GET /price` or `SEP-38 POST /quote` endpoints.
1. The Sending Anchor makes a `POST /transactions` request.
  1. The Receiving Anchor must ensure the asset, amount, transaction fields, and customers IDs are valid. The Sending Anchor may provide a `quote_id` instead of asset and amount information if [SEP-38](sep-0038.md) is supported.
  1. The Recieving Anchor must create a transaction record in their database and expose it via `GET /transactions/:id`.
  1. Transactions should initially be `pending_sender`. If any preprocessing is required before receiving a payment, mark the transaction as `pending_receiver` until ready to receive funds.
1. The Receiving Anchor then waits to receive the payment identified by the `stellar_memo` included in the `POST /transactions` response.
1. Once the Stellar payment has been received and matched with the internal transaction record, the Receiving Anchor must attempt to transfer an equivalent amount of the asset (minus fees) off-chain to the Receiving Client using the KYC and rails data collected by the Sending Anchor.
1. If the off-chain payment succeeds, the transaction's status should be updated to `completed`.
1. If the off-chain payment cannot be received by the Recieving Client almost immediately, the transaction's status should be updated to `pending_external` until received.
1. If the off-chain payment fails, the Recieving Anchor must determine why, which is outside the scope of this document. Once determined, the Receiving Anchor must either correct it themselves (internal error) or receive updated values from the Sending Anchor for the fields that were discovered to be invalid.
  1. If the invalid values were described in `GET /info`'s `transaction.fields` object, the transaction's status should be updated to `pending_transaction_info_update` and `required_info_updates` should contain an object describing the errors.
  1. If the invalid values were described in `SEP-12 GET /customer` responses, the transaction's status should be updated to `pending_customer_info_update` and the invalid field names should be returned in the next `GET /customer?id=` request for each Client.
  1. The Sending Anchor will detect the transaction's status and invalid fields, collect the info from the Sending Client, and make requests to the Receiving Anchor containing the updated information.
  1. Once the provided information is validated, the Receiving Anchor should update the transaction's status to `pending_receiver` and retry the off-chain transfer. This loop of attempting the transfer and waiting for updated information should continue until the transfer is successful.

### GET Info
#### Request

```
GET DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/info
```

Allows an anchor to communicate basic info about what currencies their `DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER` supports receiving from partner anchors.

Request parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`lang` | string | (optional) Defaults to `en`. Language code specified using [ISO 639-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1). `description` fields in the response should be in this language.

#### Response

The response should be a JSON object like:

```json
{
  "receive": {
    "USDC": {
      "enabled": true,
      "fee_fixed": 5,
      "fee_percent": 1,
      "min_amount": 0.1,
      "max_amount": 1000,
      "sep12": {
        "sender": {
          "types": {
            "sep31-sender": {
              "description": "U.S. citizens limited to sending payments of less than $10,000 in value"
            },
            "sep31-large-sender": {
              "description": "U.S. citizens that do not have sending limits"
            },
            "sep31-foreign-sender": {
              "description": "non-U.S. citizens sending payments of less than $10,000 in value"
            }
          }
        },
        "receiver": {
          "types": {
            "sep31-receiver": {
              "description": "U.S. citizens receiving USD"
            },
            "sep31-foreign-receiver": {
              "description": "non-U.S. citizens receiving USD"
            }
          }
        }
      },
      "fields":{
        "transaction":{
          "receiver_routing_number":{
            "description": "routing number of the destination bank account"
          },
          "receiver_account_number":{
            "description": "bank account number of the destination"
          },
          "type":{
            "description": "type of deposit to make",
            "choices": [
              "SEPA",
              "SWIFT"
            ]
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

The JSON object contains an entry for each Stellar asset that the Receiving Anchor supports receiving from the Sending Anchor. 

If the Receiving Anchor supports [SEP-38](sep-0038.md), the Sending Client can check the [`SEP-38 GET /prices`](sep-0038.md#get-prices) endpoint to determine which off-chain assets the Receiving Anchor can deliver to recipients in exchange for an asset listed in the [`SEP-31 GET /info` response](#get-info). If the Receiving Anchor does not provide exchange rates for an asset, it is assumed that the Stellar asset can be exchanged 1-for-1 with the corresponding off-chain asset.

#### Currency Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`sep12` | object | An object containing `sender` and `receiver` keys.
`min_amount` | number | (optional) Minimum amount. No limit if not specified.
`max_amount` | number | (optional) Maximum amount. No limit if not specified.
`fee_fixed` | number | (optional) A fixed fee in units of the destination currency. Leave blank if there is no fee or fee calculation cannot be modeled using a fixed and percentage fee.
`fee_percent` | number |(optional) A percentage fee in percentage points. Leave blank if there is no fee or fee calculation cannot be modeled using a fixed and percentage fee.
`sender_sep12_type` | string | (**deprecated**, optional) The value of the `type` parameter the Sending Anchor should use for a `SEP-12 GET /customer` request. This field can be omitted if no KYC is necessary. Use a value from `sep12.sender.types` instead if any are present.
`receiver_sep12_type` | string | (**deprecated**, optional) The value of the `type` parameter the Sending Anchor should use for a `SEP-12 GET /customer` request. This field can be omitted if no KYC is necessary. Use a values from `sep12.receiver.types` instead if any are present.
`fields` | object | An object containing the per-transaction parameters required in `POST /transactions` requests.

#### `sep12` Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`sender` | object | An object containing a `types` key if KYC information is required for the Sending Client, empty otherwise.
`receiver` | object | An object containing a `types` key if KYC information is required for the Receiving Client, empty otherwise.

#### `types` Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`types` | object | (optional) An object containing the accepted values for the `type` parameter in [SEP-12](sep-0012.md) requests. Each key should map to an object with a human-readable `description`.

If KYC is required for a Sending or Receiving client in some cases but not others, it is recommended to provide values in the respective `types` object for all cases and return an empty `fields` object from [SEP-12 GET /customer](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0012.md#customer-get) for the cases where no KYC is necessary.

#### `fields` Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`fields` | object | An object containing single `transaction` key.

#### `transaction` Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`description` | string | A description of field to show to user.
`choices` | array | (optional) A list of possible values for the field.
`optional` | boolean | (optional) false if not specified.

### POST Transactions

#### Request

This request initiates a payment. The Sending and Receiving Client must be registered via [SEP-12](sep-0012.md) if required by the Receiving Anchor.

The following is an example request body if [Sending Anchor Asset Conversions](#sending-anchor-asset-conversion) or [Stellar Network Asset Conversions](#stellar-network-asset-conversion) are used.

```
POST DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/transactions
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "amount": 100,
  "asset_code": "USD",
  "asset_issuer": "GDRHDSTZ4PK6VI3WL224XBJFEB6CUXQESTQPXYIB3KGITRLL7XVE4NWV",
  "sender_id": "d2bd1412-e2f6-4047-ad70-a1a2f133b25c",
  "receiver_id": "137938d4-43a7-4252-a452-842adcee474c",
  "fields": {
    "transaction": {
      "receiver_routing_number": "442928834",
      "receiver_account_number": "0029483242",
      "type": "SEPA"
    }
  }
}
```
---

The following is an example request body if the Sending Anchor requested an _indicative_ quote from [`SEP-38 GET /price`](sep-0038.md#get-price) and found the _estimated_ rate acceptable.

Note that the amount delivered to the Receiving Client in this scenario varies depending on the exchange rate used by the Receiving Anchor, which may differ from the rate provided in the `GET /price` response.

```
POST DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/transactions
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "amount": 100,
  "asset_code": "USD",
  "asset_issuer": "GDRHDSTZ4PK6VI3WL224XBJFEB6CUXQESTQPXYIB3KGITRLL7XVE4NWV",
  "destination_asset": "iso4217:BRL",
  "sender_id": "d2bd1412-e2f6-4047-ad70-a1a2f133b25c",
  "receiver_id": "137938d4-43a7-4252-a452-842adcee474c",
  "fields": {
    "transaction": {
      "receiver_routing_number": "442928834",
      "receiver_account_number": "0029483242",
      "type": "SEPA"
    }
  }
}
```
---

The following is an example request body if the Sending Anchor requested a _firm_ quote from [`SEP-38 POST /quote`](sep-0038.md#post-quote) and found the rate acceptable. Because the assets and amounts involved in the transaction are defined in the `POST /quote` request and response, only a `quote_id` attribute is required.

```
POST DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/transactions
Content-Type: application/json

{
  "quote_id": "2bc5b322-5117-413f-869f-e7ca494cb1a4",
  "sender_id": "d2bd1412-e2f6-4047-ad70-a1a2f133b25c",
  "receiver_id": "137938d4-43a7-4252-a452-842adcee474c",
  "fields": {
    "transaction": {
      "receiver_routing_number": "442928834",
      "receiver_account_number": "0029483242",
      "type": "SEPA"
    }
  }
}
```

##### Request Parameters

Name | Type | Description
-----|-----|------
`amount` | number | (optional) Amount of the Stellar asset sent to the Receiving Anchor.
`asset_code` | string | (optional) Code of the asset the Sending Anchor intends to send. This must match one of the entries listed in the receiving anchor's `GET /info` endpoint.
`asset_issuer` | string | (optional) The issuer of the Stellar asset the Sending Anchor intends to send. If not specified, the asset sent must be issued by the Receiving Anchor.
`destination_asset` | string | (optional) The off-chain asset the Receiving Anchor will deliver to the Receiving Client. The value must match one of the `asset` values included in a [`SEP-38 GET /prices?sell_asset=stellar:<asset_code>:<asset_issuer>`](sep-0038.md#get-prices) response using [SEP-38 Asset Identification Format](sep-0038.md#asset-identification-format).
`quote_id` | string | The `id` returned from a `SEP-38 POST /quote` response. If this attribute is specified, none of the attributes listed above should also be included in the request. The Stellar transaction used to send the asset _must_ have a `created_at` timestamp that is earlier than the quote's `expires_at` attribute.
`sender_id` | `string` | (optional) The ID included in the [SEP-12 PUT /customer](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0012.md#customer-put) response for the Sending Client. Only required if the `GET /info` response's `sep12.sender.types` object is non-empty.
`receiver_id` | `string` | (optional) The ID included in the [SEP-12 PUT /customer](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0012.md#customer-put) response for the Receiving Client. Only required if the `GET /info` response's `sep12.receiver.types` object is non-empty. 
`fields` | object | An object containing the values requested by the Receiving Anchor in the `GET /info` endpoint.
`lang` | string | (optional) Defaults to `en`. Language code specified using [ISO 639-1](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_639-1).  Any human-readable error codes or field descriptions will be returned in this language.

#### Responses

##### Success (201 Created)

This is the successful case where a Receiving Anchor confirms that they can fulfill this payment as described. The response body should be a JSON object with the following values

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | string | The persistent identifier to check the status of this payment.
`stellar_account_id` | string | The Stellar account to send payment to.
`stellar_memo_type` | string | The type of memo to attach to the Stellar payment (`text`, `hash`, or `id`).
`stellar_memo` | string | The memo to attach to the Stellar payment.

##### Customer Info Needed (400 Bad Request)

In the case where the Sending Anchor didn't provide all the KYC information requested in `SEP-12 GET /customer`, or where the Receiving Anchor requires additional KYC information after `amount`, the response should include a 400 status code and the following body. The sender should then retry both the `SEP-12 GET /customer` request to collect the additional fields and the `SEP-12 PUT /customer` request including all fields described in the `GET /customer` response.

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`error`| string | `customer_info_needed`
`type` | string | (optional) A string for the `type` URL argument the Sending Anchor should use when making the `SEP-12 GET /customer` request. The value should be included in the `sender.types` or `receiver.types` object from `GET /info`.

##### Transaction Info Needed (400 Bad Request)

In the case where the Sending Anchor didn't provide all the information requested in `GET /info`, the response should include a 400 status code the following body.  The Sending Anchor should then retry the entire request including all the previously sent fields plus the fields described in the response.

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`error`| string | `transaction_info_needed`
`fields` | object | A key-value pair of missing fields in the same format as fields described in [`GET /info`](#get-info).

##### Error (400 Bad Request)

In the case where the transaction cannot be completed, return an error response body containing an `error` key describing the error in human-readable format in the language indicated in the request.

```
{
  'error': "The amount was above the maximum limit"
}

{
  'error': "That bank account is restricted via AML laws"
}
```

### GET Transaction

The transaction endpoint enables Sending Clients to fetch information on a specific transaction with the Receiving Anchor.

```
GET DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/transactions/:id
```

Request parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | string | The id of the transaction.

On success the response should include a `200 OK` HTTP status code and the following body:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`transaction` | object | The transaction that was requested by the client.

`transaction` Object Schema

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | string | The ID returned from the `POST /transactions` request that created this transaction record.
`status` | string | The status of the transaction. Values are outlined below.
`status_eta` | number | (optional) The estimated number of seconds until a status change is expected.
`amount_in` | string | (optional) The amount of the Stellar asset received or to be received by the Receiving Anchor. Excludes any fees charged after Receiving Anchor receives the funds.
`amount_in_asset` | string | (optional) The asset received or to be received by the Receiving Anchor. Must be present if `quote_id` or `destination_asset` was included in the `POST /transactions` request. The value must be in [SEP-38 Asset Identification Format](sep-0038.md#asset-identification-format).
`amount_out` | string | (optional) The amount sent by the Receiving Anchor to Receiving Client.
`amount_out_asset` | string | (optional) The asset delivered to the Receiving Client. Must be present if `quote_id` or `destination_asset` was included in the `POST /transactions` request. The value must be in [SEP-38 Asset Identification Format](sep-0038.md#asset-identification-format).
`amount_fee` | string | (optional) The amount of fee charged by the Receiving Anchor.
`amount_fee_asset` | string | (optional) The asset in which fees are calculated in. Must be present if `quote_id` or `destination_asset` was included in the `POST /transactions` request. The value must be in [SEP-38 Asset Identification Format](sep-0038.md#asset-identification-format).
`stellar_account_id` | string | The Stellar account to send the payment to.
`stellar_memo_type` | string | The type of memo to attach to the Stellar payment: `text`, `hash`, or `id`.
`stellar_memo` | string | The memo to attach to the Stellar payment.
`started_at` | UTC ISO 8601 string | (optional) Start date and time of transaction.
`completed_at` | UTC ISO 8601 string | (optional) Completion date and time of transaction.
`stellar_transaction_id` | string | (optional) The transaction_id on Stellar network of the transfer that initiated the payment.
`external_transaction_id` | string | (optional) The ID of transaction on external network that completes the payment into the receivers account.
`refunded` | boolean | (optional) Should be true if the transaction was refunded. Not including this field means the transaction was not refunded.
`required_info_message` | string | (optional) A human-readable message indicating any errors that require updated information from the sender.
`required_info_updates` | object | (optional) A set of fields that require update values from the Sending Anchor, in the same format as described in [GET /info](#get-info).  This field is only relevant when `status` is `pending_transaction_info_update`.

`status` should be one of:

* `pending_sender` -- awaiting payment to be sent by Sending Anchor.
* `pending_stellar` -- transaction has been submitted to Stellar network, but is not yet confirmed.
* `pending_customer_info_update` -- certain pieces of information need to be updated by the Sending Anchor. See the [Pending Customer Info Update](#pending-customer-info-update) section for more information.
* `pending_transaction_info_update` -- certain pieces of information need to be updated by the sending anchor. See the [Pending Transaction Info Update](#pending-transaction-info-update) section for more information.
* `pending_receiver` -- payment is being processed by the Receiving Anchor.
* `pending_external` -- payment has been submitted to external network, but is not yet confirmed.
* `completed` -- funds have been delivered to the Receiving Client.
* `error` -- catch-all for any error not enumerated above.

Example response:

```json
{
  "transaction": {
      "id": "82fhs729f63dh0v4",
      "status": "pending_external",
      "status_eta": 3600,
      "external_transaction_id": "ABCDEFG1234567890",
      "amount_in": "18.34",
      "amount_out": "18.24",
      "amount_fee": "0.1",
      "started_at": "2017-03-20T17:05:32Z"
    }
}
```

```json
{
  "transaction": {
      "id": "82fhs729f63dh0v4",
      "status": "pending_transaction_info_update",
      "status_eta": 3600,
      "external_transaction_id": "ABCDEFG1234567890",
      "amount_in": "18.34",
      "amount_out": "18.24",
      "amount_fee": "0.1",
      "started_at": "2017-03-20T17:05:32Z",
      "required_info_message": "The bank reported an incorrect account number for the receiver, please ensure the account matches legal documents",
      "required_info_updates": {
         "transaction": {
            "receiver_account_number": {
               "description": "The receiver's bank account number"
            }
         }
      }
    }
}
```

If the transaction cannot be found, the endpoint should return a `404 NOT FOUND` result.

#### Pending Customer Info Update

In certain cases the Receiving Anchor might need to request updated information from the Sending Anchor.  For example, if the bank tells the Receiving Anchor that the provided Receiving Client's name is incorrect or missing a middle initial. Since this information was sent via SEP-12, the transaction should go into the `pending_customer_info_update` state until the Sending Anchor makes another `SEP-12 PUT /customer` request to update. The Sending Anchor can check which fields need to be updated by making a `SEP-12 GET /customer` request including the `id` or `account` & `memo` parameters. The Receiving Anchor should respond with a `NEEDS_INFO` status and `last_name` included in the fields described.

#### Pending Transaction Info Update

Another possibility is that the per-transaction information provided in the `POST /transactions` `fields` object was later discovered to be invalid. In this case, the transaction should go into the `pending_transaction_info_update` state until the Sending Anchor makes a request to the endpoint outlined below. 

### PATCH Transaction

This endpoint should only be used when the Receiver Anchor requests more info via the `pending_transaction_info_update` status.  The `required_info_updates` transaction field should contain the fields required for the update. If the Sending Anchor tries to update at a time when no info is requested, the Receiver Anchor should fail with an error response.

```
PATCH DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/transactions/:id
```

Request parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`id` | string | The id of the transaction.
`fields` | object | A key-pair object containing the values requested to be updated by the receiving anchor in the same format as `fields` in the [`POST /transactions`](#post-transactions) request.

#### Example

```
PATCH DIRECT_PAYMENT_SERVER/transactions/82fhs729f63dh0v4

{
   "fields": {
      "transaction": {
         "receiver_bank_account": "12345678901234",
         "receiver_routing_number": "021000021"
      }
   }
}
```

#### Success 200 OK

If the information was successfully updated, respond with a 200 status code, and return a response body matching `GET /transactions/:id`. The transaction should return to `pending_receiver`, though it is possible that the information could still need to be updated again.

#### Not Found 404

If the transaction specified by `"id"` does not exist, return a 404 response.

#### Error 400

If the information was malformed, or if the sender tried to update data that isn't updatable, return a 400 with an object containing an error message.

```
{
   "error": "Supplied fields do not allow updates, please only try to updates the fields requested"
}
