## Preamble

```
SEP: 0008
Title: Regulated Assets
Author: Interstellar.com, Howard Chen <@howardtw>
Status: Active
Created: 2018-08-22
Updated: 2021-01-08
Version 1.1.1
```

## Simple Summary

Regulated Assets are assets that require an issuer’s approval (or a delegated third party’s approval, such as a licensed securities exchange) on a per-transaction basis. It standardizes the identification of such assets as well as defines the protocol for performing compliance checks and requesting issuer approval.

## Target Audience

Asset issuers, issuance platforms, wallet developers, and exchanges

## Motivation

Stellar is an ideal platform for issuing securities. Regulation sometimes requires asset issuers to monitor and approve each transaction involving issued assets and to enforce constraints. This is possible on the Stellar network today, however there exists no standard interface between wallets and issuers to negotiate approval.

## Overview

Implementing a regulated asset requires these parts:
- Issuer account with appropriate [authorization flags] set.
- [SEP-1 stellar.toml] used for discovering [Approval Server].
- [Approval Server] that validates client transactions according to the service's approval criteria. Validated transactions are signed by the asset's issuing account.

## Regulated Assets Approval Flow

1. Wallet creates and signs a transaction.
2. Wallet resolves asset information and detects that it's a regulated asset.
	1. Wallet can detect whether an asset is a regulated asset by checking the [authorization flags] of the asset issuer's account.
3. Wallet sends the transaction to the approval server.
	1. Wallet can find the approval server via [SEP-1 stellar.toml] set up by the issuer.
4. Approval server determines whether the transaction should be approved.
5. Wallet handles approval response:
    1. *Success?* Transaction has been approved and signed by the issuer.
    2. *Revised?* Transaction has been revised to be made compliant, and signed by the issuer. Wallet will show the changes to the user and ask them to sign the new transaction. **It is important to understand that an approval service could respond with a different transaction.**
    3. *Pending?* The issuer could not determine whether to approve this transaction at the moment. Wallet can re-send the same transaction to the approval server later (Return to 3).
    4. *Action Required?* Transaction requires a user action to be completed. Wallet will present the attached action url as a clickable link, along with the attached message and an option to resubmit once the action has been taken.
    5. *Rejected?* Wallet should display the associated error message to the user.

## Authorization Flags

Regulated asset issuers must have both `Authorization Required` and `Authorization Revocable` flags set on their account. This allows the issuer to grant and revoke authorization to transact the asset at will.

## SEP-1 stellar.toml

Issuers advertise the existence of an Approval Service through their [SEP-1 stellar.toml] file. This is done in the `[[CURRENCIES]]` section as different assets can have different requirements.

### Fields:

These fields are listed in the `[[CURRENCIES]]` section:

- `regulated` is a boolean indicating whether or not this is a regulated asset. If missing, `false` is assumed.
- `approval_server` is the URL of an approval service that signs validated transactions.
- `approval_criteria` is a human readable string that explains the issuer's requirements for approving transactions.

### Example

```toml
[[CURRENCIES]]
code="GOAT"
issuer="GD5T6IPRNCKFOHQWT264YPKOZAWUMMZOLZBJ6BNQMUGPWGRLBK3U7ZNP"
regulated=true
approval_server="https://goat.io/tx_approve"
approval_criteria="The goat approval server will ensure that transactions are compliant with NFO regulation"
```

## Transaction Composition

A transaction that an approval server will approve consists of operations that authorize the clients' accounts, transact the regulated asset, and deauthorize the clients' accounts. If a transaction is built this way, there will be no point where the clients' accounts have open, authorized trustlines to run unapproved operations because of transaction atomocity. A transaction as described above can be built by wallets preemptively or by approval servers in order to make it compliant when the [revised](#revised) status is applicable.

Depending on whether issuers want to allow the clients' accounts to maintain offers, issuers can leave the accounts in the `AUTHORIZE_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG` state or completely deauthorize the accounts when completing the operation. See [CAP-18] for the fine-grained control of authorization.

An example of the transaction where the issuer allow the client's account to maintain offers:

```
Operation 1: AllowTrust op where issuer fully authorizes account A, asset X
Operation 2: Account A manages offer to buy or sell X
Operation 3: AllowTrust op where issuer sets account A, asset X to AUTHORIZED_TO_MAINTAIN_LIABILITIES_FLAG state
```

An example of the transaction where the issuer do not allow the clients' accounts to maintain offers:

```
Operation 1: AllowTrust op where issuer fully authorizes account A, asset X
Operation 2: AllowTrust op where issuer fully authorizes account B, asset X
Operation 3: Payment from A to B
Operation 4: AllowTrust op where issuer fully deauthorizes account B, asset X
Operation 5: AllowTrust op where issuer fully deauthorizes account A, asset X
```

## Approval Server

Approval server is a single endpoint that receives a signed transaction, checks for compliance, and signs it on success.

The specification of an approval server is defined as follows:

### Content Type

Approval server accepts requests in the `Content-Type`:

- `application/x-www-form-urlencoded`

Approval server responds with the `Content-Type`:

- `application/json`

### POST Endpoint

#### Request

This endpoint accepts HTTP POST requests containing a single `tx` parameter.

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`tx` | string | A base64 encoded transaction envelope XDR signed by the user. This is the transaction that will be tested for compliance and signed on success.

###### Example (Form)

```
tx=AAAAAHAHhQtYBh5F2zA6...
```

#### Responses

All responses will contain a top level `status` parameter that indicates the type of the result.

##### Success

This response means that the transaction was found compliant and signed without being revised.

A `success` response will have a `200` HTTP status code and `success` as the `status` value.

Parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`status` | string | `"success"`
`tx` | string | Transaction envelope XDR, base64 encoded. This transaction will have both the original signature(s) from the request as well as one or multiple additional signatures from the issuer.
`message` | string | (optional) A human readable string containing information to pass on to the user.

###### Example

```json
{
  "status": "success",
  "tx": "AAAAAHAHhQtYBh5F2zA6..."
}
```

##### Revised

This response means that the transaction was revised to be made compliant.

A `revised` response will have a `200` HTTP status code and `revised` as the `status` value.

It is important for the user to examine the revised transaction before re-signing it. More specifically, the user should make sure that the revised transaction does not contain any additional operations whose source account matches the source account of the original operation(s).

Parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`status` | string | `"revised"`
`tx` | string | Transaction envelope XDR, base64 encoded. This transaction is a revised compliant version of the original request transation, signed by the issuer.
`message` | string | A human readable string explaining the modifications made to the transaction to make it compliant.

###### Example

```json
{
  "status": "revised",
  "tx": "AAAAAHAHhQtYBh5F2zA6...",
  "message": "Authorization and deauthorization operations were added."
}
```

##### Pending

This response means that the issuer could not determine whether to approve the transaction at the time of receiving it. Wallet can re-submit the same transaction at a later point in time.

A `pending` response will have a `200` HTTP status code and `pending` as the `status` value.

Parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`status` | string | `"pending"`
`timeout` | integer | Number of milliseconds to wait before submitting the same transaction again.
`message` | string | (optional) A human readable string containing information to pass on to the user.

###### Example

```json
{
  "status": "pending",
  "message": "Futher verifications are required due to..."
}
```

##### Action Required

This reponse means that the user must complete an action before this transaction can be approved. The approval service will provide a URL that facilitates the action. Upon completion, the user will resubmit the transaction.

An `action_required` response will have a `200` HTTP status code and `action_required` as the `status` value.

Parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`status` | string | `"action_required"`
`message` | string | A human readable string containing information regarding the action required.
`action_url` | string | A URL that allows the user to complete the actions required to have the transaction approved.

###### Example

```json
{
  "status": "action_required",
  "message": "Please sign the terms of service via the provided URL.",
  "action_url": "https://..."
}
```

##### Rejected

This response means that the transaction is not compliant and could not be revised to be made compliant.

A `rejected` response will have a `400` HTTP status code and `rejected` as the `status` value.

Parameters:

Name | Type | Description
-----|------|------------
`status` | string | `"rejected"`
`error` | string | A human readable string explaining why the transaction is not compliant and could not be made compliant.

###### Example

```json
{
  "status": "rejected",
  "message": "The destination account is blocked."
}
```

### Best practices

- Issuers using the `revised` status to make a transaction complaint is encouraged as it can take the burdens away from the wallets.
- If a transaction was revised, ALWAYS explain the changes that were made to a transaction through the `message` parameter.
- Wallet should inspect revised transactions and alert the user if any of the original operations are changed.
- Core operations shouldn't be modified as that can be confusing and misleading. For example, if the user wishes to put an offer for 1000 GOATS but due to velocity limits they can only put an offer for 500 GOATS, it is better to error with a message than to change the amount.
- Adding an upper timebound to a transaction can help the issuer ensure that their view of the world does not get out of sync.
- Issuers can enforce additional fees by adding additional operations. For example, any transaction involving GOATs, will also send 0.1 GOAT to the issuer's account.

## Discussion

### Should my asset be a regulated asset?

Ideally, no. Implementing Regulated Assets should only be used when absolutely necessary, such as for regulatory reasons. It comes with a substantial operational overhead, added complexity, and burden for users. Issuers should only go down this route if it is absolutely required.

### Why doesn’t the approval service submit transactions to the network?

- Separation of concerns between signing transactions and submitting them.
- Transactions might require more signatures from further regulated asset issuers.
- Wallets can handle the failure from transaction submission based on the type of errors and reconstruct the transaction.
- Scaling concerns as having the approval server submit transactions would require more infrastructure.

[SEP-1 stellar.toml]: https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0001.md
[authorization flags]: #authorization-flags
[Approval Server]: #approval-server
