## Preamble

```
SEP: 0021
Title: On-chain signature & transaction sharing
Author: Mister.Ticot
Track: Informational
Status: Draft
Created: 2018-08-31
```

_(Personal note: this is the first time I'm doing a protocol proposal. Please be helpful if you think something is wrong
or missing. Also I'm not a native English speaker and I'll appreciate any help to make this document clearer.)_

## Simple Summary

This SEP define a standard way to share signatures and transaction directly on any Stellar blockchain. This is to
complement the on-chain multi-signature account setup available directly in Stellar Core.

## Status of this SEP

This SEP is a draft and is open for further discussion. Those condition should be met before approval:

- The reference implementation fully implement the present protocol. [DONE]
- Any security / critical issue that would be found by reviewers are solved.
- We define a default network for signature & transaction sharing.

The expected delay to meet those condition is one month (from creation).

## Abstract

Multi-signature account setup and multi-operation with multi-sources transactions are directly supported by Stellar
Core. Finding a way to keep the multiple involved parties is left to wallet/services developers. However, if each
developer do it its own way, there's no compatibility and while the feature is technically available it won't become
practically available.

This calls for a simple and well-defined protocol of how one can share signatures and transactions between co-signers.

There's two potentially overlapping cases were signature and transaction sharing makes sense:

- For account with multiple signers
- For transactions with multiple sources

It is desirable handle signatures collection / transaction sharing in a reliable, transparent and resilient manner.
There are several good reason to implement this directly on the Stellar blockchain:

- We don't rely on any external software.
- We use a well-tested and well-known solution.
- We automatically get strong security, transparency, decentralization, resilience.
- Signatures can stay for ever (important for some smart contracts implementations).
- This is elegant.

## Definition

For the sake of clarity, the following terms will always be used as defined here:

- **primary source**: The account for which signature and transaction sharing may be enabled. In context of a
  transaction, the primary source account.
- **sources** (plural): Refer to the whole set of sources for a particular transaction. A transaction can have more than
  one source because each of its operation can have its own source.
- **source network**: The network on which **primary source** exists.
- **legit signer**: For a account, it is a public key or a preimage registered as signer. For a transaction, it is an
  account or a preimage registered as signer for one or more **sources**.
- **legit signers** (plural): Refer to the whole set of possible **legit signer**.
- **collection account**: The account dedicated to the task of "receiving" signatures and transactions.
- **collection network**: The network on which **collection account** exists. This may or may not be the same than
  **source network**.
- **mirror account**: When **source network** and **collection network** are different, the account with the same public
  key **legit signers** create on **collection network**. When **source network** and **collection network** are the
  same, **mirror account** is to be taken as any **legit signer** account.
- **main transaction**: The transaction that we could share, and for which we could share signatures.
- **sharing transaction**: A transaction that embed signatures or a transaction to be shared.

## Specifications

The present standard is network-agnostic. While a default **collection network** is to be defined in case user doesn't
provide one, it is compatible with public network, test network and any standard Stellar custom/private network. User is
free to choose to use any of them according to its needs. Signature and transaction sharing doesn't have to happen on
**source network**.

The data is stored and accessed _via_ **collection account** transaction history. First, **collection account** is
created for this sole purpose. Then, signatures and transactions can be "sent" to **collection account** by creating a
transaction made of a minimal payment to it, and one or more _manageData_ operations embedding the data. The data can be
retrieved by fetching **collection account** history.

### On-chain signature & transaction sharing configuration

On-chain signature & transaction sharing configuration is stored in **primary source** data entries. There's three of
them: `config:multisig`, `config:multisig:network` & `config:multisig:server`. The two last are optional.

On-chain signature & transaction sharing is enabled for **primary source** when it have the `config:multisig` account
entry set. Its value should be the public key of **collection account**. However, the present protocol could be extended
by accepting another type of value here, so we could support off-chain signature & transaction sharing scheme at a later
time. If `config:multisig` is set but is not a Stellar public key, implementation should emit an exception that account
for this possibility, like :

> The requested signature & transaction sharing method is not supported or is invalid: expected 'config:multisig' to be
> a Stellar account Id.

Optionally, **collection network** can be defined in the `config:multisig:network` account entry. This should be either
'public', 'test' or any valid network passphrase. If defined, implementators must use the requested network. Else,
implementators must use the default network.

The `config:multisig:server` is for specifying an horizon server URL. If specified, implementation must use it. An
exception must be thrown if it is not set when a custom network is set up (any network passphrase that is not the one
for test or public network).

### Enabling on-chain signature & transaction sharing

**collection account** should be an account created for the sole purpose of signature & transaction sharing. The secret
seed should be destroyed after keypair generation. A typical transaction to enable on-chain signature & transaction
sharing is:

```
(on **source network**)
source: **primary source**
operations:
  - manageData: set account entry 'config:multisig' to '**collection account** accountId'
  (optionaly set 'config:multisig:network' and 'config:multisig:server')
```

In order to send signatures & transactions, **collection account** and **mirror accounts** have to be created, and
**mirror accounts** have to be able to pay for transaction fees. This could be done at this step, or the first time data
is sent. (The reference implementation does it first time data is sent.)

This protocol is said enabled for a transaction when and only when its **primary source** enabled it. In that case, any
party must share signatures according to the **primary source** configuration regardless of the fact they enabled the
protocol on their own account. Conversely, if the **primary source** of a transaction has not enabled the protocol, none
of the party should make use of it even if they enabled it on their own account.

### Disable on-chain signature & transaction sharing

All the account entries related to signature & transaction sharing must be unset.

```
(on **source network**)
source: **source account**
operations:
  - manageData: unset account entry 'config:multisig'
  (unset 'config:multisig:network' and 'config:multisig:server' when relevant)
```

### Sending transactions

The purpose of sending a transaction to **collection account** is to share transaction requests between co-signers of
**primary source**. It is by no means a way for an external actor to send transaction request. However, anybody can
listen to transaction requests and it is possible for external actor that may have to participate into multi-source
transactions to listen and retrieve transaction requests.

The **main transaction** XDR (without signatures) is split into chunks of 64bits and each chunk is sequentially embedded
into a _manageData_ operation. The name of the _manageData_ operation must be 'Send'. The **sharing transaction** memo
is a _hash memo_ set to the **main transaction** hash. The **sharing transaction** source must be a **legit signer** for
**primary source** else an exception must be thrown.

```
(on **collection network**)
source: **mirror account**
memo: (hash) transaction hash
operations
  - Send 0.0000001 XLM to **collection account**
  - Set data entry 'Send' to '{transaction_chunk1}'
  - Set data entry 'Send' to '{transaction_chunk2}'
  ...
  - Set data entry 'Send' to '{transaction_chunkN}'
```

### Fetching transactions

**collection account** transaction history is scanned backward for transactions with 'hash' memo. When those are
encountered, and only if its source is a **primary source** **legit signer**, the record is retrieved and the
transaction re-built from chunks. Implementators may save the ledger cursor to differentiate between requests which have
already been presented to the user and new requests.

### Sending signatures

**mirror account** send a **sharing transaction** with a _rethash memo_ set to the txHash of the signed transaction. One
_payment_ or _createAccount_ operation set **collection account** as destination, so the transaction will figure in
**collection account** transaction history. One or more operation  
_manageData_ operations set a data entry whose name starts is 'Send' to the value of signatures.

Example

```
(on **collection network**)
source: **mirror account**
memo: (rethash) {transaction_hash}
operations:
  - Send 0.0000001 XLM to **collection account**
  - Set data entry 'Send' to '{signature1_value}'
  - Set data entry 'Send' to '{signature2_value}'
```

Implementators must only send signatures that haven't been shared yet.

### Fetching signatures for a specific transaction

**collection account** transaction history is scanned backward for **sharing transactions** with _rethash memo_ equal to
the hash **main transaction** and source being one of the **legit signers**. Each matched **sharing transaction** is
scanned for _manageData_ operations which set an account entry named 'Send', and retrieve the associated value as a
possible signature. A signature is considered legit and must be used only when it is from a **legit signer**.

### Default **collection network**

Specifying a default **collection network** allow to skip setting 'conf:multisig:network' in most case. The default
**collection network** have to be specified in the present SEP so that every implementation use the same.

At that time the reference implementation is set to use test network by default. The advantage of using test network
are: it exists, it is free to use, it is maintained by the SDF. The disadvantage is that it may get reset at some point.

Using public network as the default have the advantage of robustness, but come with a cost and would burden the network.
It seems better to only leave the option open for when it is really meaningful (smart contracts).

Running a custom network seems ideal, however this makes sense only if we can keep it running smoothly on the long run.
It means a core of validator have to take on this task. It also imply a cost in money and time.

Reviewers are welcome to discuss this issue so we can make a clever decision in the coming month.

## Allowing external transaction requests

In this standard, only the co-signers of **primary account** are allowed to share transactions in the scope of managing
the account together. However, one or more signer(s) with powerless summed weights might be added to **primary account**
for the purpose of allowing them to pass transaction requests.

## Optimizations

The implementator is free to make any relevant optimization over this protocol, as long as it doesn't alter its
functioning. In particular, retrieved data may be cached and _cursors_ or _ledger_ values may be used in order to
differentiate between data which have already been presented to the user and data which have not, and to speed up
retrieving process.

## Possible drawbacks

A few drawbacks have been pointed:

- It is slower than off-chain solution (one update every 5s).

If a high-speed synchronization is needed, an off-chain solution is clearly preferable. However, most use cases can be
properly handled with the present protocol.

- It may become a burden because of data weight (if using public network).
- It comes with a cost (when using public network).

Using public network (and thus paying fees) seems desirable in some specific use cases like smart contract
implementation. This protocol is indeed an interesting alternative to pre-signed transaction, as there's no limit to the
number of pre-signed transaction. Also, the signature cannot be removed after being shared while pre-signed transaction
setup can eventually be changed.

Having a free-to-use dedicated default network will make the present protocol useful as well for every user.

## Possible attacks

### From external actors

A malicious actor could send a bunch of transaction to **collection account** in order to make legit data retrieving
slower. However, this won't prevent it and **primary source** can later switch to a new **collection account** simply by
changing `multisig:conf`, which make this attack of few interest.

External actors haven't any other possibility, as transaction and signatures are only retrieved when shared by **legit
signers**.

### From co-signers

A malicious **legit signers** could send wrongly-formatted data in an attempt to trigger exception the protocol
implementation and stop the data retrieving process. This could be used to prevent retrieval of signatures for a
transaction that would have a negative impact of this malicious actor. For this reason, implementators have to make sure
any wrongly-formatted transaction is handled properly.

Implementators should also avoid using **main transaction** request as the breaking point when retrieving signatures for
**main transaction**, as a malicious **legit signer** could leverage this behavior by sending a second **main
transaction** request to shadow some signatures. While implementators should not allow this behavior, this is still
possible to do by other means.

## Resources

- Reference implementation (JavaScript): [stellar-oc-multisig](https://github.com/MisterTicot/js-stellar-oc-multisig)
- Community thread: [On-chain signature collection](https://galactictalk.org/d/1436-on-chain-signature-collection)
