## Preamble

```
SEP: 0014
Title: Dynamic Asset Metadata
Author: OrbitLens <orbit.lens@gmail.com>, Paul Tiplady <paul@qwil.com>
Track: Standard
Status: Active
Created: 2018-09-30
Updated: 2019-03-12
Discussion: https://groups.google.com/forum/?utm_medium=email&utm_source=footer#!topic/stellar-dev/-S7FIXJAi2A
Version 1.0.0
```

## Simple Summary

This SEP extends [SEP-0001](../ecosystem/sep-0001.md) and adds the support of the dynamic asset metadata resolution. It
describes a standard way to query asset metadata, thereby allowing the issuer to deal with an unlimited number of assets
without defining each of them in `stellar.toml` file.

## Motivation

Current [SEP-0001](../ecosystem/sep-0001.md) specification works excellent for issuers that manage only a few assets.
However, `stellar.toml` has a size limit of 100 KB, effectively reducing the maximum possible number of assets to ~300
per file. At present time there is no standard way for the anchor to provide metadata for a large number of assets
issued by the same anchor. There are plenty of use-cases that require issuing thousands of assets: bonds, securities,
futures, non-fungible tokens.

## Specification

To allow dynamic asset properties resolution, the issuer implements the described REST API endpoint and advertises the
existence of a Dynamic Asset Metadata Service through the `stellar.toml` file. Top-level parameter
`ASSET_METADATA_SERVER` should contain a fully-qualified URL of a metadata resolution service.

Example of `stellar.toml`:

```
ASSET_METADATA_SERVER="https://anchor.com/assets"
...
```

### Asset Metadata Resolution Flow

- The client discovers the `home_domain` for the asset issuing account and downloads `stellar.toml`.
- Once the file is downloaded and parsed, the client searches for the asset by its code in `[[CURRENCIES]]` section.
- If the metadata for the asset was not found in `[[CURRENCIES]]` section, the client checks for the top-level
  `ASSET_METADATA_SERVER` parameter.
- If present, the client pulls a metadata from the remote server using the URL defined in `ASSET_METADATA_SERVER`
  parameter.

### API Endpoints

Dynamic Asset Metadata Service exposes a single REST API endpoint.

    GET <ASSET_METADATA_SERVER>

This API endpoint returns the metadata for all assets issued by the anchor. It follows Horizon REST API format
convention.

**Request**

Request query parameters:

- **code** - Filters assets by the asset code.
- **issuer** - Filters assets by the issuer account.
- **cursor** - Asset code from which to continue the search (referred also as `paging_token` in a result set).
- **order** - Results ordering - `"asc"`(default) or `"desc"`.
- **limit** - Data page size. Default `10`, maximum `200`.

Example:

    curl https://example.com/?issuer=GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U&order=asc&limit=2

**Response**

On success, the endpoint should return `200 OK` HTTP status code and JSON-encoded object containing the list of the
issued assets' metadata. A response result should contain records and navigation links following Horizon response
convention.

Example:

```
{
  "_links": {
    "self": {
      "href": "https://example.com/?order=asc&limit=2"
    },
    "prev": {
      "href": "https://example.com/?cursor=BRL-GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U&order=desc&limit=2"
    },
    "next": {
      "href": "https://example.com/?cursor=BSD-GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U&order=asc&limit=2"
    }
  },
  "_embedded": {
    "records": [
      {
        "code": "BRL",
        "issuer": "GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U"
        "name": "Brazil Real",
        "paging_token": "BRL-GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U"
      },
      {
        "code": "BSD",
        "issuer": "GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U"
        "name": "Bahamas Dollar",
        "paging_token": "BSD-GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWC6L7U"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

#### CORS headers

In order to comply with browser cross-origin access policies, the service should provide wildcard CORS response HTTP
header. The following HTTP header must be set for both API endpoints:

```
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
```

## Design Rationale

Such minimalistic design provides simple and convenient interface for exchanges, wallets, infrastructure apps, and
external services.

## Security Concerns

N/A

## Implementation

Reference implementation of the Dynamic Asset Metadata Service for NodeJS can be found
[here](https://github.com/orbitlens/stellar-dynamic-asset-metadata-server).
