## Preamble

```
SEP: 0029
Title: Account Memo Requirements
Author: OrbitLens, Tomer Weller, Leigh McCulloch, David Mazières
Status: Draft
Created: 2019-12-27
Updated: 2020-02-03
Version: 0.2.0
```

## Simple Summary

This SEP describes a standard way to define transaction memo requirements for
incoming payments. 

## Motivation

Custodial wallets often use a single Stellar account for all deposits/withdrawals,
relying on the transaction `memo` to disambiguate incoming payments.
Users frequently forget to fill in a memo in their deposit transactions.
Dealing with missing memos may result in lost funds and requires manual actions
from the custodial support staff.

We introduce a basic convention that allows defining memo requirements on the
account level.

Although this interoperability standard aims to deal with a missing memo problem
in the first place, it can be also utilized by a wider class of Stellar-based
applications to designate additional interaction or compliance prerequisites.

## Abstract

An account owner configures memo requirements by adding a data entry that
specifies the supported memo type to the account. Each wallet ensures that
requirements are met before submitting the transaction to the network.

## Specification

To set up memo prerequisites for an account, the owner submits a transaction
with `MANAGE_DATA` operation that adds a data entry with the name
`config.memo_required` and value containing the expected memo type 
(either `MEMO_TEXT`, `MEMO_ID`, `MEMO_HASH`, or `MEMO_RETURN`). Multiple values
allowed in a comma-separated form, for example `MEMO_TEXT,MEMO_ID`.

When a user submits a transaction containing a `PAYMENT`,
`PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_SEND`, `PATH_PAYMENT_STRICT_RECEIVE`, or `MERGE_ACCOUNT`
operation, the wallet fetches account details from Horizon
[`/accounts/{account}`](https://www.stellar.org/developers/horizon/reference/endpoints/accounts-single.html)
endpoint for an address specified in the operation `destination` field.
If the destination account has `config.memo_required` data entry set, the wallet
verifies that `memo` field is set and `memo_type` matches the provided value.
To avoid disambiguation, the wallet should always convert the value of
`config.memo_required` data entry to all uppercase letters and trim
leading/trailing spaces before matching memo type. If `memo` is not set or the
actual `memo_type` does not match the expected value, the wallet shows a
notification and prevents the transaction from submission.

For transactions containing more than one operation, the wallet performs the
same checks for every operation.

The Horizon server executes the same verification routine server-side when it
receives the transaction and returns an exception without sending it to the
network if memo requirements are violated. The implementation of blocking
transactions with invalid memos on the Horizon level does not eliminate the
need to verify the requirements on the wallet level.

## Rationale

Multiplexed accounts proposal by David Mazières an even more advanced and
comprehensive solution for the problem described above, but its adoption by the
whole ecosystem and custodial exchanges will require much more time, as well as
development efforts. Specifying memo requirements in a form of data entry
attached to the account introduces a simple way of enforcing transaction
memo requirements without changing the underlying protocol. 

From the practical experience, most exchanges and wallets always use `MEMO_TEXT`
for sending outgoing payments, even if the destination exchange clearly uses
only numeric identifiers. Allowing multiple values in the memo type requirements
aims to handle such cases.

The name of the data entry follows the namespaces format proposed in SEP-18.

## Security Concerns

N/A