## Preamble

```
SEP: 0001
Title: stellar.toml
Author: stellar.org
Status: Active
Created: 2017-10-30
Updated: 2019-06-12
Version: 2.1.0
```

## Simple Summary

The `stellar.toml` file is used to provide a common place where the Internet can find information about your organization’s Stellar integration. By setting the homedomain of your Stellar account to the domain that hosts your `stellar.toml`, you can create a definitive link between this information and that account. Any website can publish Stellar network information, and the `stellar.toml` is designed to be readable by both humans and machines.

If you are an anchor or issuer, the `stellar.toml` file serves a very important purpose: it allows you to publish information about your organization and token(s) that help to legitimize your offerings. Clients and exchanges can use this information to decide whether a token should be listed. Fully and truthfully disclosing contact and business information is an essential step in responsible token issuance.

If you are a validator, the `stellar.toml` file allows you to declare your node(s) to other network participants, which improves discoverability, and contributes to the health and decentralization of the network as a whole. 

## Specification

Given the domain `DOMAIN`, the `stellar.toml` will be searched for at the following location:

```
https://DOMAIN/.well-known/stellar.toml
```

You must enable CORS on the `stellar.toml` so people can access this file from other sites. The following HTTP header must be set for an HTTP response for `/.well-known/stellar.toml` file request.

```
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
```

It is also recommended to set a `text/plain` content type so that browsers render the contents, rather than prompting for a download.

```
content-type: text/plain
```

`stellar.toml` can have a maximum file size of 100KB.

`stellar.toml` is in [TOML](https://github.com/toml-lang/toml) file format. The `stellar.toml` fields and sections are described below. You should complete as much of this as you can. Many Stellar apps, including important wallets and exchanges, make decisions on which tokens to support based on the completeness of their Account Information and Documentation sections.

### Account Information

These are global fields in the `stellar.toml` file.

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
NETWORK_PASSPHRASE | string | The passphrase for the specific [Stellar network](https://www.stellar.org/developers/guides/concepts/networks.html) this infrastructure operates on
FEDERATION_SERVER | uses `https://` | The endpoint for clients to resolve stellar addresses for users on your domain via [SEP-2](sep-0002.md) Federation Protocol
AUTH_SERVER | uses `https://` | The endpoint used for [SEP-3](sep-0003.md) Compliance Protocol
TRANSFER_SERVER | uses `https://` | The server used for [SEP-6](sep-0006.md) Anchor/Client interoperability
TRANSFER_SERVER_SEP0024 | uses `https://` | The server used for [SEP-24](sep-0024.md) Anchor/Client interoperability 
KYC_SERVER | uses `https://` | The server used for [SEP-12](sep-0012.md) Anchor/Client customer info transfer
WEB_AUTH_ENDPOINT | uses `https://` | The endpoint used for [SEP-10 Web Authentication](sep-0010.md)
SIGNING_KEY | Stellar public key | The signing key is used for [SEP-3](sep-0003.md) Compliance Protocol and [SEP-10](sep-0010.md) Authentication Protocol
HORIZON_URL | url | Location of public-facing Horizon instance (if you offer one)
ACCOUNTS | list of `G...` strings | A list of Stellar accounts that are controlled by this domain 
VERSION | string | The version of SEP-1 your `stellar.toml` adheres to.  This helps parsers know which fields to expect.
URI_REQUEST_SIGNING_KEY | Stellar public key | The signing key is used for [SEP-7](sep-0007.md) delegated signing

### Issuer Documentation

These fields go in the `stellar.toml` `[DOCUMENTATION]` table.

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
ORG_NAME | string | Legal name of your organization
ORG_DBA | string | (may not apply) [DBA](https://www.entrepreneur.com/encyclopedia/doing-business-as-dba) of your organization
ORG_URL | uses `https://` | Your organization's official URL. Your `stellar.toml` must be hosted on the same domain.
ORG_LOGO | url | A PNG image of your organization's logo on a transparent background
ORG_DESCRIPTION | string | Short description of your organization
ORG_PHYSICAL_ADDRESS | string | Physical address for your organization
ORG_PHYSICAL_ADDRESS_ATTESTATION | `https://` url | URL on the same domain as your `ORG_URL` that contains an image or pdf official document attesting to your physical address. It must list your `ORG_NAME` or `ORG_DBA` as the party at the address. Only documents from an official third party are acceptable. E.g. a utility bill, mail from a financial institution, or business license.
ORG_PHONE_NUMBER | string | Your organization's phone number in [E.164 format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E.164), e.g. `+14155552671`. See also [this guide](https://support.twilio.com/hc/en-us/articles/223183008-Formatting-International-Phone-Numbers).
ORG_PHONE_NUMBER_ATTESTATION | `https://` url | URL on the same domain as your `ORG_URL` that contains an image or pdf of a phone bill showing both the phone number and your organization's name.
ORG_KEYBASE | string | A [Keybase](https://keybase.io/) account name for your organization. Should contain proof of ownership of any public online accounts you list here, including your organization's domain.
ORG_TWITTER | string | Your organization's Twitter account
ORG_GITHUB | string | Your organization's Github account
ORG_OFFICIAL_EMAIL | string | An email where clients can contact your organization. Must be hosted at your `ORG_URL` domain.
ORG_LICENSING_AUTHORITY | string | Name of the authority or agency that licensed your organization, if applicable
ORG_LICENSE_TYPE | string | Type of financial or other license your organization holds, if applicable
ORG_LICENSE_NUMBER | string | Official license number of your organization, if applicable

Issuers that list verified information including phone/address attestations and [Keybase](https://keybase.io/) verifications will be prioritized by Stellar clients.

### Point of Contact Documentation

These fields go in the `stellar.toml` `[[PRINCIPALS]]` list. It contains identifying information for the primary point of contact or principal(s) of the organization.

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
name | string | Full legal name
email | string | Business email address for the principal
keybase | string | Personal Keybase account. Should include proof of ownership for other online accounts, as well as the organization's domain.
telegram | string | Personal Telegram account
twitter | string | Personal Twitter account
github | string | Personal Github account
id_photo_hash | string | SHA-256 hash of a photo of the principal's government-issued photo ID
verification_photo_hash | string | SHA-256 hash of a verification photo of principal. Should be well-lit and contain: principal holding ID card and signed, dated, hand-written message stating `I, $NAME, am a principal of $ORG_NAME, a Stellar token issuer with address $ISSUER_ADDRESS.`

`$NAME` is the principal's full legal name, `$ORG_NAME` is the name of the organization and must match the value in the `stellar.toml` file, and `$ISSUER_ADDRESS` is the Stellar address of the organization/issuer.

The photo hashes allow principals to provide proof of identity to businesses and important clients. The photos can be sent privately, and the recipient can verify that the hashes match. Wallets and Stellar exchanges may request this information from an issuer and add an "ID verified" badge to the issuer's tokens in their interface.

The public key in the verification photo should be the issuing public key for the issuer's assets. If there are multiple, please include the multiple keys in the statement.

### Currency Documentation

These fields go in the `stellar.toml` `[[CURRENCIES]]` list, one set of fields for each currency issued. Complete all applicable fields, and exclude any that don't apply.

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
code | string (<= 12 char) | Token code
code_template | string (<= 12 char) | A pattern with `?` as a single character wildcard. Allows a `[[CURRENCIES]]` entry to apply to multiple assets that share the same info. An example is futures, where the only difference between issues is the date of the contract. E.g. `CORN????????` to match codes such as `CORN20180604`.
issuer | `G...` string | Token issuer Stellar public key
status | string | Status of token. One of `live`, `dead`, `test`, or `private`. Allows issuer to mark whether token is dead/for testing/for private use or is live and should be listed in live exchanges.
display_decimals | int (0 to 7) | Preference for number of decimals to show when a client displays currency balance
name | string (<= 20 char) | A short name for the token
desc | string | Description of token and what it represents
conditions | string | Conditions on token
image | url | URL to a PNG image on a transparent background representing token
fixed_number | int | Fixed number of tokens, if the number of tokens issued will never change
max_number | int | Max number of tokens, if there will never be more than `max_number` tokens
is_unlimited | boolean | The number of tokens is dilutable at the issuer's discretion
is_asset_anchored | boolean | `true` if token can be redeemed for underlying asset, otherwise `false`
anchor_asset_type | string | Type of asset anchored. Can be `fiat`, `crypto`, `stock`, `bond`, `commodity`, `realestate`, or `other`.
anchor_asset | string | If anchored token, code / symbol for asset that token is anchored to. E.g. USD, BTC, SBUX, Address of real-estate investment property.
redemption_instructions | string | If anchored token, these are instructions to redeem the underlying asset from tokens.
collateral_addresses | list of crypto address strings | If this is an anchored crypto token, list of one or more public addresses that hold the assets for which you are issuing tokens.
collateral_address_messages | list of message strings | Messages stating that funds in the `collateral_addresses` list are reserved to back the issued asset. See below for details.
collateral_address_signatures | list of signature strings | These prove you control the `collateral_addresses`. For each address you list, sign the entry in `collateral_address_messages` with the address's private key and add the resulting string to this list as a base64-encoded raw signature.
regulated| boolean | indicates whether or not this is a [sep0008](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0008.md) regulated asset. If missing, `false` is assumed.
approval_server | url | url of a [sep0008](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/blob/master/ecosystem/sep-0008.md) compliant approval service that signs validated transactions.
approval_criteria | string | a human readable string that explains the issuer's requirements for approving transactions.


Message to put in `collateral_address_messages` for each entry in `collateral_addresses`:

```
The assets in the account $PUBLIC_KEY are reserved to back $CODE issued by $ISSUER_ADDRESS on Stellar. Valid from $START to $END.
```

Replace `$PUBLIC_KEY` with the account's public key, `$CODE` with your asset code, `$ISSUER_ADDRESS` with the issuing Stellar address and `$START`, `$END` with the date range in ISO 8601 for which the reserve is valid. `$END` cannot be more than a year in the future to ensure yearly renewals of the commitment. `collateral_addresses` can be used to externally validate that you hold a reserve for the crypto funds you are issuing on Stellar. Issuers that hold a provable 100% reserve are prioritized by wallets and clients. Issuers not meeting this standard may not be listed.

Note: `fixed_number`, `max_number`, and `is_unlimited` are mutually exclusive issuance policies. Include exactly one of those fields.

Alternately, `stellar.toml` can link out to a separate TOML file for each currency by specifying `toml="https://DOMAIN/.well-known/CURRENCY.toml"` as the currency's only field.

### Validator Information

These fields go in the `stellar.toml` `[[VALIDATORS]]` list, one set of fields for each node your organization runs.  Combined with the steps outlined in [SEP-20](sep-0020.md), this section allows you to declare your node(s), and to let others know the location of any public archives you maintain.   Complete all applicable fields, and exclude any that don't apply.  

Field | Requirements | Description
------|--------------|------------
ALIAS | string | A name for display in stellar-core configs that conforms to `^[a-z0-9-]{2,16}$`
DISPLAY_NAME | string | A human-readable name for display in quorum explorers and other interfaces
PUBLIC_KEY | `G...` string | The Stellar account associated with the node
HOST | string | The IP:port or domain:port peers can use to connect to the node
HISTORY | uri | The location of the history archive published by this validator

## Testing

### Tools

Use the community-supported `stellar.toml` checker: https://stellar.sui.li/toml-check

### Manual

1. Run a curl command in your terminal similar to the following (replace stellar.org with the hosting location of your `stellar.toml` file):

```sh
curl --head https://stellar.org/.well-known/stellar.toml
```

2. Verify the Access-Control-Allow-Origin header is present as shown below.

```sh
curl --head https://stellar.org/.well-known/stellar.toml
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Accept-Ranges: bytes
Access-Control-Allow-Origin: *
Content-length: 482
...
```

3. Also run the command on a page that should not have it and verify the `Access-Control-Allow-Origin` header is missing.

## Example

```toml
# Sample stellar.toml

NETWORK_PASSPHRASE="Public Global Stellar Network ; September 2015"
FEDERATION_SERVER="https://api.domain.com/federation"
AUTH_SERVER="https://api.domain.com/auth"
TRANSFER_SERVER="https://api.domain.com"
SIGNING_KEY="GBBHQ7H4V6RRORKYLHTCAWP6MOHNORRFJSDPXDFYDGJB2LPZUFPXUEW3"
HORIZON_URL="https://horizon.domain.com"
ACCOUNTS=[
"GD5DJQDDBKGAYNEAXU562HYGOOSYAEOO6AS53PZXBOZGCP5M2OPGMZV3",
"GAENZLGHJGJRCMX5VCHOLHQXU3EMCU5XWDNU4BGGJFNLI2EL354IVBK7",
"GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWA6L7U"
]
VERSION="2.0.0"

[DOCUMENTATION]
ORG_NAME="Organization Name"
ORG_DBA="Organization DBA"
ORG_URL="https://www.domain.com"
ORG_LOGO="https://www.domain.com/awesomelogo.png"
ORG_DESCRIPTION="Description of issuer"
ORG_PHYSICAL_ADDRESS="123 Sesame Street, New York, NY 12345, United States"
ORG_PHYSICAL_ADDRESS_ATTESTATION="https://www.domain.com/address_attestation.jpg"
ORG_PHONE_NUMBER="1 (123)-456-7890"
ORG_PHONE_NUMBER_ATTESTATION="https://www.domain.com/phone_attestation.jpg"
ORG_KEYBASE="accountname"
ORG_TWITTER="orgtweet"
ORG_GITHUB="orgcode"
ORG_OFFICIAL_EMAIL="support@domain.com"

[[PRINCIPALS]]
name="Jane Jedidiah Johnson"
email="jane@domain.com"
keybase="crypto_jane"
twitter="crypto_jane"
github="crypto_jane"
id_photo_hash="be688838ca8686e5c90689bf2ab585cef1137c999b48c70b92f67a5c34dc15697b5d11c982ed6d71be1e1e7f7b4e0733884aa97c3f7a339a8ed03577cf74be09"
verification_photo_hash="016ba8c4cfde65af99cb5fa8b8a37e2eb73f481b3ae34991666df2e04feb6c038666ebd1ec2b6f623967756033c702dde5f423f7d47ab6ed1827ff53783731f7"

[[CURRENCIES]]
code="USD"
issuer="GCZJM35NKGVK47BB4SPBDV25477PZYIYPVVG453LPYFNXLS3FGHDXOCM"
display_decimals=2

[[CURRENCIES]]
code="BTC"
issuer="GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWA6L7U"
display_decimals=7
anchor_asset_type="crypto"
anchor_asset="BTC"
redemption_instructions="Use SEP6 with our federation server"
collateral_addresses=["2C1mCx3ukix1KfegAY5zgQJV7sanAciZpv"]
collateral_address_signatures=["304502206e21798a42fae0e854281abd38bacd1aeed3ee3738d9e1446618c4571d10"]

# asset with meta info
[[CURRENCIES]]
code="GOAT"
issuer="GD5T6IPRNCKFOHQWT264YPKOZAWUMMZOLZBJ6BNQMUGPWGRLBK3U7ZNP"
display_decimals=2
name="goat share"
desc="1 GOAT token entitles you to a share of revenue from Elkins Goat Farm."
conditions="There will only ever be 10,000 GOAT tokens in existence. We will distribute the revenue share annually on Jan. 15th"
image="https://static.thenounproject.com/png/2292360-200.png"
fixed_number=10000

[[VALIDATORS]]
ALIAS="domain-au"
DISPLAY_NAME="Domain Australia"
HOST="core-au.domain.com:11625"
PUBLIC_KEY="GD5DJQDDBKGAYNEAXU562HYGOOSYAEOO6AS53PZXBOZGCP5M2OPGMZV3"
HISTORY="http://history.domain.com/prd/core-live/core_live_001/"

[[VALIDATORS]]
ALIAS="domain-sg"
DISPLAY_NAME="Domain Singapore"
HOST="core-sg.domain.com:11625"
PUBLIC_KEY="GAENZLGHJGJRCMX5VCHOLHQXU3EMCU5XWDNU4BGGJFNLI2EL354IVBK7"
HISTORY="http://history.domain.com/prd/core-live/core_live_002/"

[[VALIDATORS]]
ALIAS="domain-us"
DISPLAY_NAME="Domain United States"
HOST="core-us.domain.com:11625"
PUBLIC_KEY="GAOO3LWBC4XF6VWRP5ESJ6IBHAISVJMSBTALHOQM2EZG7Q477UWA6L7U"
HISTORY="http://history.domain.com/prd/core-live/core_live_003/"

# optional extra information for humans
# Useful place for anchors to detail various policies and required info

###################################
# Required compliance fields:
#      name=<recipient name>
#      addr=<recipient address>
# Federation Format:
#        <phone number>*anchor.com
#        Forwarding supported by sending to: forward*anchor.com
#           forward_type=bank_account
#           swift=<swift code of receiving bank>
#           acct=<recipient account number at receiving bank>
# Minimum Amount Forward: $2 USD
# Maximum Amount Forward: $10000 USD

```
