## Preamble

```
SEP: To Be Assigned
Title: Non-Fungible Token Standard
Author: George Kudrayvtsev <george@stellar.org>
Track: Standard
Status: Draft
Created: 2021-01-31
Updated: 2021-01-31
Version: 0.1.0
Discussion: TBD
```

## Simple Summary
This SEP defines a standard interface for non-fungible tokens (NFTs) on the Stellar network, including an issuance model and metadata fields. It draws inspiration from the [EIP-721 standard](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721).


## Motivation
A standard interface for NFTs that makes NFTs issued by any ecosystem application (such as a wallet or marketplace) accessible and interoperable with any other ecosystem application supporting NFTs.


## Abstract
Non-fungible tokens (NFTs) can describe many types of assets, from digital collectibles to physical items. This protocol defines a standard series of steps that NFT creators should use to issue NFTs on the Stellar network, defines metadata to describe an NFT, and specifies how the metadata is linked to the NFT asset on Stellar.

The issuance model involves four steps:

  1. An account is created specifically to represent the NFT in the Stellar ledger.
  2. The account configures itself with metadata describing the NFT.
  3. The account issues a new Stellar asset representing ownership over said NFT.
  4. Any account holding that asset lays claim to the NFT.

The NFT model involves two levels of indirection in order to minimize on-chain storage:

    +---------------+      +----------+      +---------+
    |  Stellar NFT  | ---> | metadata | ---> |   NFT   |
    |  account data |      |   JSON   |      | content |
    +---------------+      +----------+      +---------+


## Specification
This SEP defines an [issuance model](#issuance-model) that defines how NFT assets are issued on Stellar and a [metadata specification](#nft-metadata-specification) that defines how data about the NFT is captured. The metadata is stored in a way such that the Stellar network guarantee its authenticity.

### Issuance Model
Standard issuance of NFTs must take the following steps:

  1. Create an account to represent the NFT: `CreateAccountOp(A, <reserve>)`
  2. Configure the NFT's metadata pointer, as described [below](#nft-account-description): `ManageDataOp("type", "...")`
  3. Form an asset describing your NFT: `Code:Issuer` (where issuer is `A`)
  4. Create a distribution account: `B = CreateAccountOp()` and `ChangeTrust("Code:Issuer", <limit>)`
  5. Issue the tokens: `PaymentOp(B, "Code:Issuer", <amount>)`
  6. (Optional) Lock the issuing account: `SetOptionsOp(MasterWeight: 0)`

Note that without this final step, there are concerns around both immutability and supply: an account may modify its NFT metadata pointer or issue more tokens unless it's locked down. Thus, Step 6 is recommended.

Ownership of the token directly conveys ownership of a unit of the NFT, however that may be defined. Other scenarios such as ownership transfers via payments are built on top of this basic issuance model and are thus extraneous to this SEP.

Other issuance models may exist and may be compatible with the following specification, but this is the standard issuance model on Stellar.

### NFT Specification
This specification is partially inspired by Ethereum's [EIP-721 specification](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-721#specification) on NFTs; however, it is generalized to arbitrary asset types (i.e. not necessarily images).

In order to minimize the costs of on-chain storage, we have multiple levels of indirection of NFT metadata. The only thing the NFT account stores on-chain is a description of where to find the metadata.

#### NFT Account Description
A proper NFT account should specify its `homedomain`. It should also configure the asset in its domain's `stellar.toml` file (see [SEP-1](https://stellar.org/sep-1#currency-documentation)) if appropriate.

There are two **required** fields on the account itself:

| Field       | Purpose |
| ----------- | ------- |
| `type`      | Describes how the "first hop" of metadata is defined, standard values include `ipfshash` and `uri` |
| `hash`      | The [SHA3](https://csrc.nist.gov/publications/detail/fips/202/final) hash of the metadata contents |


##### `type`
The two possible values for the `type` field describe two standard ways to store the metadata, and the details will be in a data entry corresponding to this value. In other words, `type: ipfshash` means that you should look under the `ipfshash` key data entry which further defines how to find the metadata.

All other values for the `type` are considered non-standard until they are approved for inclusion within this SEP.

##### `hash`
The `hash` is provided to ensure integrity of the metadata that the account is pointing to. This prevents the data at the destination from being modified without explicit knowledge and approval by the issuer.

If it is excluded, the NFT **must not be considered genuine**, _unless_ the `type` is `ipfshash`, since the IPFS CID includes an integrity check on the data it points to. 

##### Storage
Fields should be stored as simple key-value pairs within an account's data entries. The standard limitations of `ManageDataOp` apply: field names and their values can only be 64 bytes each. Most metadata attributes should be stored at the NFT reference location itself.

**Backward Compatibility:** Existing NFT platforms essentially default to `type: ipfshash`. While this standard aims to free up the ecosystem from dependence on IPFS, it should also work with existing conventions that developed organically. To do so, **if you see an account with a lone `ipfshash` data entry, you may treat it as equivalent to an NFT account with `type: ipfshash`**.

##### IPFS Storage
If the `type` is `ipfshash`, the `ipfshash` key must point to an [IPFS Content IDentifier](https://docs.ipfs.io/concepts/content-addressing/) corresponding to the location of the metadata.

If you are the issuer, make sure you understand the implications of using IPFS. You must use an IPFS lookup service to actually resolve to the metadata. For example, [this URL](https://cloudflare-ipfs.com/ipfs/QmaydGEshbL7HMQkD6FZPcMeEt6o15aC4p4P82VxQ7amjy) resolves to the Meridian 2021 Hat NFT via the Cloudflare IPFS service. If you're the issuer, you must also ensure that the resource is addressable and accessible on the IPFS network by running your own IPFS node or entrusting a provider to do so.

##### URL Storage
If the `type` is `uri`, the corresponding `uri` key must point to a [valid URI](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) containing the NFT's metadata. 

_Note_: While you could technically describe metadata living on the IPFS with a URL by pointing to a specific node or a URI prefixing the CID with `ipfs://`, we recommend describing _only_ its CID to leave lookups to the users.

#### Standard Metadata Specification
This section describes the metadata itself rather than how to find it. 

The metadata must be valid JSON and must contain the following **required** fields:

| Field       | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| `name` | a short name or title for the NFT |
| `description` | a longer, more-detailed description of the NFT |
| `type` | a [Media Type](https://www.iana.org/assignments/media-types/media-types.xhtml) describing the NFT's primary format (pointed to by `url`) |
| `uri` **or** `url`  | a [URI](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) pointing to the actual NFT contents |
| `issuer` | a Stellar public key ([`G...`](https://stellar.org/protocol/sep-23)) corresponding to the account which issued this NFT |
| `code` | the NFT's asset code |

We allow either `uri` or `url` to maintain compatibility with existing ecosystem conventions. If _both_ are present, prefer the `uri`.

For example,

```json
{
  "name": "A demonstration of NFT metadata",
  "description": "This is a description of the cool NFT used in this demo.",
  "type": "image/png",
  "url": "https://cloudflare-ipfs.com/ipfs/QmXoypizjW3WknFiJnKLwHCnL72vedxjQkDDP1mXWo6uco/I/m/RickAstleyNeverGonnaGiveYouUp7InchSingleCover.jpg",
  "issuer": "GALAXYVOIDAOPZTDLHILAJQKCVVFMD4IKLXLSZV5YHO7VY74IWZILUTO",
  "code": "DEMOASSET"
}
```

Means that the `DEMOASSET:GALAXYVOIDAOPZTDLHILAJQKCVVFMD4IKLXLSZV5YHO7VY74IWZILUTO` asset represents [this image](https://cloudflare-ipfs.com/ipfs/QmXoypizjW3WknFiJnKLwHCnL72vedxjQkDDP1mXWo6uco/I/m/RickAstleyNeverGonnaGiveYouUp7InchSingleCover.jpg).

There are other fields which are **optional** but standardized:

| Field       | Description |
| ----------- | ----------- |
| fulldescription | an *even longer* description of the NFT than afforded by the `description` field, encoded in base64 |
| image | a [URI](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) pointing to an image representation of the NFT |
| video | a [URI](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) pointing to a video representation of the NFT |
| audio | a [URI](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986) pointing to a audio representation of the NFT |
| domain | a [domain name](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1035#section-2.3.1) corresponding to a place that owns or renders this NFT | 

These fields should be self-explanatory.

### A Full Example
We start with an official SDF NFT: the [Meridian 2021 hat NFT](https://www.litemint.com/items/GDOA2FECYKBVG2RQYG5JQO6EBLCDBWZ7MFBEZY6AIBJ4NDXV3XEVCVBC/MERIDIAN2021). It's issued by [this account](https://horizon.stellar.org/accounts/GDOA2FECYKBVG2RQYG5JQO6EBLCDBWZ7MFBEZY6AIBJ4NDXV3XEVCVBC/) and stores the following entry in its `data` field:

```json
{
  "ipfshash": "UW1heWRHRXNoYkw3SE1Ra0Q2RlpQY01lRXQ2bzE1YUM0cDRQODJWeFE3YW1qeQ=="
}
```

Upon decoding the value from base64 (since a `ManageDataOp`'s value is just raw bytes), we get an IPFS CID:

    QmaydGEshbL7HMQkD6FZPcMeEt6o15aC4p4P82VxQ7amjy

Looking this up on IPFS [via CloudFlare](https://cloudflare-ipfs.com/ipfs/QmaydGEshbL7HMQkD6FZPcMeEt6o15aC4p4P82VxQ7amjy) gives us the full metadata:

```json
{
  "name": "Meridian 2021: Hat",
  "description": "Virtual swag from Meridian 2021!  Find out more about Meridian at https://meridian.stellar.org",
  "image": "ipfs://QmTAQ1e5zD4rxEspDgSZNgqXb73LBEj2wpQkDTj1UvCmv6",
  "url": "https://ipfs.io/ipfs/QmTAQ1e5zD4rxEspDgSZNgqXb73LBEj2wpQkDTj1UvCmv6",
  "code": "MERIDIAN2021",
  "issuer": "GDOA2FECYKBVG2RQYG5JQO6EBLCDBWZ7MFBEZY6AIBJ4NDXV3XEVCVBC",
  "domain": "meridian.litemint.store",
  "supply": 50,
  "video": "ipfs://QmeDxfvNpoizLxP4xLNrx1QuykPSqXEyZL8tVceZGudcvs"
}
```

We can see that this account [really does](https://horizon.stellar.org/operations/164563600389443587) own and issue this asset, meaning the NFT is genuine.


## Design Rationale

### On the issuance model
The issuance model follows Stellar's [standard model for issuing assets](https://developers.stellar.org/docs/issuing-assets/how-to-issue-an-asset/): there's an _issuing account_ and a _distribution account_. The benefits of this model are described in the linked document, but the most important one is this: it makes it easier to track supply. In the world of NFTs, it's really important to track how many of a particular token are in circulation, and using a distribution account achieves this goal.

### On the metadata specification
Since not all issuers will use `ipfshash`, which already provides integrity by including the hash within the CID, we need the `hash` field to further NFT authenticity.

While `ipfs://cid` is a type of URI, we allow `type: ipfshash` for compatibility with existing ecosystem conventions as well as to highlight the popularity of IPFS as a storage mechanism in the NFT ecosystem.

The field `uri` was chosen in preference to `url` in order to emphasize that data does not have to live on the traditional Web. Since URLs are a subset of URIs, this should not pose a problem to Web-centric platforms, and the specification still allows `url` for ecosystem compatibility.


## Security Concerns
While there are no direct security concerns to the network introduced by this SEP, the trust model of NFTs deserves some clarification.

Digital assets are infinitely and perfectly reproduceable by virtue of being digital. Thus, the goal of an NFT should **not** be to represent ownership or possession of a particular digital asset, but rather to represent the existence of a particular _relationship_ with the issuer.

Those processing an NFT should take care to ensure that the `issuer` field matches the account referencing the NFT, and that the `code` is in fact an asset issued by said account. Without these two links, you cannot make any conclusions about the NFT.


## Changelog
- `v0.1.0`: Initial draft ([#1111](https://github.com/stellar/stellar-protocol/pulls/1111)).
